Progris riport 1 martch 3.Dr Strauss says I shoud rite down what I think and remembir and evrey thingthat happins to me from now on. I dont no why but he says its importint sothey will see if they can use me. I hope they use me becaus Miss Kinnian saysmabye they can make me smart. I want to be smart. My name is Charlie GordonI werk in Dormers bakery where Mr Donner gives me 11 dollers a week and bredor cake if I want. I am 32 yeres old and next munth is my brithday. I tollddr Strauss and perfesser Nemur I cant rite good but he says it dont matter hesays I shud rite just like I talk and like I rite compushishens in Miss Kinniansclass at the beekmin collidge center for retarted adults where I go tolern 3 times a week on my time off. Dr Strauss says to rite a lot evrythingI think and evrything that happins to me but I cant think anymor because Ihave nothing to rite so I will close for today... yrs truly CharlieGordon.

%%%%%Progris riport 2 - martch 4.I had a test today. I think I faled it and I think mabye now they wont useme. What happind is I went to Prof Nemurs office on my lunch time like theysaid and his secertery took me to a place that said psych dept on the doorwith a long hall and alot of littel rooms with onley a desk and chares. Anda nice man was in one of the rooms and he had some wite cards with ink spilldall over them. He sed sit down Charlie and make yourself cunfortible andrilax. He had a wite coat like a docter but I dont think. he was no docterbecause he dint tell me to opin my mouth and say ah. All he had was thosewite cards. His name is Burt. I fergot his last name because I dont remembirso good.
I dint know what he was gonna do and I was holding on tite to the chair likesometimes when I go to a dentist onley Burt aint no dentist neither but hekept telling me to rilax and that gets me skared because it always means itsgonna hert.
So Burt sed Charlie what do you see on this card. I saw the spilld ink andI was very skared even tho I got my rabits foot in my pockit because when Iwas a kid I always faled tests in school and I spilld ink to.I tolld Burt I saw ink spilld on a wite card. Burt said yes and he smild andthat maid me feel good. He kept terning all the cards and I tolld himsomebody spilld ink on all of them red and black. I thot that was a easy testbut when I got up to go Burt stoppd me and said now sit down Charlie we arenot thru yet. Theres more we got to do with these cards. I dint understandabout it but I remembir Dr Strauss said do anything the testor telld me evenif it dont make no sense because thats testing.
I dont remembir so good what Burt said but I remembir he wantid me to saywhat was in the ink. I dint see nothing in the ink but Burt sed there waspicturs there. I coudnt see no picturs. I reely tryed to see. I holded thecard up close and then far away. Then I said if I had my eye glassis I coudprobaly see better I usully only ware my eyeglassis in the movies or to watchTV but I sed maybe they will help me see the picturs in the ink. I put themon and I said now let me see the card agars I bet I find it now.I tryed hard but I still coudnt find the picturs I only saw the ink. I tolldBurt mabey I need new glassis. He rote somthing down on a paper and I gotskared of faling the test. So I tolld him it was a very nice pictur of inkwith pritty points all around the eges but he shaked his head so that wasntit neither. I asked him if other pepul saw things in the ink and he sed yesthey imagen picturs in the inkblot. He tolld me the ink on the card was calldinkblot.
Burt is very nice and he tasks slow like Miss Kinman dose in her class whereI go to lern reeding for slow adults. He explaned me it was a raw shok test. Hesed pepul see things in the ink. I said show me where. He dint show me hejust kept saying think imagen theres something on the card. I tolld him I imaggena inkblot.
He shaked his head so that wasnt rite eather. He said what does it remind youof pretend its something. I closd my eyes for a long time to pretend and then Isaid I pretend a bottel of ink spilld all over a wite card. And thats whenthe point on his pencel broke and then we got up and went out.I dont think I passd the raw shok test.

%%%%%3d progris riport.Martch 5 - Dr Strauss and prof Nemur say it dont matter about the ink on thecards. I tolld them I dint spill the ink on them and I coudnt see anything inthe ink. They said maybe they will still use me. I tolld Dr Strauss that MissKinnian never gave me tests like that only riting and reeding. He said MissKinnian tolld him I was her bestist pupil in the Beekman School for retartedadults and I tryed the hardist becaus I reely wantd to lern I wantid it moreeven then pepul who are smarter even then me.
Dr Strauss askd me how come you went to the Beekman School all by yourselfCharlie. How did you find out about it. I said I dont remembir.Prof Nemur said but why did you want to lern to reed and spell in the fristplace. I tolld him because all my life I wantid to be smart and not dumb andmy mom always tolld me to try and lern just like Miss Kinnian tells me butits very hard to be smart and even when I lern something in Miss Kinniansclass at the school I ferget alot.
Dr Strauss rote some things on a peice of paper and prof Nemur talkd to mevery sereus. He said you know Charlie we are not shure how this experamintwill werk on pepul because we onley tried it up to now on animils. I saidthats what Miss Kinnian tolld me but I dont even care if it herts or anythingbecause Im strong and I will werk hard.
I want to get smart if they will let me. They said they got to get permissenfrom my familie but my uncle Herman who use to take care of me is ded and Idont remember about my familie. I dint see my mother or father or my littelsister Norma for a long long long time. Mabye their ded to. Dr Strauss askd mewhere they use to live. I think in brooklin. He sed they will see if mabye theycan find them.
I hope I dont have to rite to much of these progris ri-ports because it takesalong time and I get to sleep very late and Im tired at werk in the morning. Gimpyhollered at me because I droppd a tray full of rolles I was carryingover to the oven. They got derty and he had to wipe them off before he putthem in to bake. Gimpy hollers at me all the time when I do something rong,but he reely likes me because hes my frend. Boy if I get smart wont he beserprised.

%%%%%Progris riport 4.Mar 6 - I had more crazy tests today in case they use me. That same place buta differnt littel testing room. The nice lady who give it to me tolld me thename and I askd her how do you spell it so I can put it down rite in myprogis riport. THEMATIC APPERCEPTON TEST. I dont know the frist 2 werds butI know what test means. You got to pass it or you get bad marks.
This test lookd easy because I coud see the picturs. Only this time she dintwant me to tell what I saw in the picturs. That mixd me up. I tolld her yesterdayBurt said I shoud tell what I saw in the ink. She said that dontmake a difrence because this test is something else. Now you got to make upstorys about the pepul in the picturs.
I said how can I tell storys about pepul I dont know. She said make beleevebut I tolld her thats lies. I never tell lies any more because when I was akid I made lies and I always got hit. I got a pictur in my walet of me andNorma with Uncle Herman who got me the job to be janiter at Dormers bakerybefore he dyed.
I said I coud make storys about them because I livd with Uncle Herman alongtime but the lady dint want to hear about them. She said this test and theother one the raw shok was for getting persinality. I laffd. I tolld her howcan you get that thing from cards that sombody spilld ink on and fotos ofpepul you dont even no. She lookd angrey and took the picturs away. I dontcare.
I gess I faled that test too.
Then I drawed some picturs for her but I dont drawer so good. Later theother testor Burt in the wite coat came back his name is Burt Selden and hetook me to a diferent place on the same 4th floor in the Beekman Universitythat said PSYCHOLOGY LABORATORY on the door. Burt said PSYCHOLOGY meansminds and LABORATORY meens a place where they make spearamints. I thot he mentlike where they made the chooing gum but now I think its puzzels and games becausethats what we did.
I coudnt werk the puzzels so good because it was all broke and the peicescoudnt fit in the holes. One game was a paper with lines in all derectionsand lots of boxs. On one side it said START and on the other end it saidFINISH. He tolld me that game was amazed and I shoud take the pencil and gofrom where it said START to where it said FINISH withowt crossing over any ofthe lines.
I dint understand the amazed and we used up a lot of papers. Then Burt saidlook I'll show you something lets go to the sperimental lab mabye youll getthe idea. We went up to the 5th floor to another room with lots of cages andanimils they had monkys and some mouses. It had a funny smel like oldgarbidge. And there was other pepul in wite coats playing with the animils soI thot it was like a pet store but their wasnt no customers. Burt took a witemouse out of the cage and showd him to me. Burt said thats Algernon and hecan do this amazed very good. I tolld him you show me how he does that.Well do you know he put Algernon in a box like a big tabel with alot oftwists and terns like all kinds of walls and a START and a FINISH like thepaper had. Only their was a skreen over the big tabel. And Burt took out hisclock and lifted up a slidding door and said lets go Algernon and the mousesniffd 2 or 3 times and startid to run. First he ran down one long row andthen when he saw he coudnt go no more he came back where he startid from andhe just stood there a minit wiggeling his wiskers. Then he went off in theother derection and startid to run again.
It was just like he was doing the same thing Burtwanted me to do with the lines on the paper. I was laffing because I thot itwas going to be a hard thing for a mouse to do. But then Algernon kept goingall the way threw that thing all the rite ways till he came out where it saidFINISH and he made a squeek. Burt says that means he was happy because he didthe thing rite.
Boy I said thats a smart mouse. Burt said woud you like to race againstAlgernon. I said sure and he said he had a differnt kind of amaze made ofwood with rows skratched in it and an electrik stick like a pencil. And hecoud fix up Algernons amaze to be the same like that one so we could both bedoing the same kind.
He moved all the bords around on Algemons tabel because they come apart andhe could put them together in differnt ways. And then he put the skreen backon top so Algernon woudnt jump over any rows to get to the FINISH. Then hegave me the electrik stick and showd me how to put it in between the rows andIm not suppose to lift it off the bord just follow the little skratches untilthe pencil cant move any more or I get a little shock.
He took out his clock and he was trying to hide it. So I tryed not to lookat him and that made me very nervus.
When he said go I tryed to go but I dint know where to go. I didnt know theway to take. Then I herd Algernon squeeking from the box on the tabel and hisfeet skratching like he was runing alredy. I startid to go but I went in therong way and got stuck and a littel shock in my fingers so I went back to theSTART but evertime I went a differnt way I got stuck and a shock. It didnthert or anything just made me jump a littel and Burt said it was to show meI did the wrong thing. I was haffway on the bord when I herd Algernon squeeklike he was happy again and that means he won the race.And the other ten times we did it over Algernon won evry time because Icoudnt find the right rows to get to where it says FINISH. I dint feel badbecause I watched Algernon and I lernd how to finish the amaze even if ittakes me along time.
I dint know mice were so smart.

%%%%%Progris riport 5 mar 6.They found my sister Norma who lives with my mother in Brooklin and she gavepermissen for the operashun. So their going to use me. Im so exited I canhardley rite it down. But then Prof Nemur and Dr Strauss had a argament aboutit frist. I was sitting in Prof Nemurs office when Dr Strauss and Burt Seldencame in. Prof Nemur was worryed about using me but Dr Strauss tolld him Ilooked like the best one they testid so far. Burt tolld him Miss Kinnianrekemmended me the best from all the people who she was teaching at thecenter for retarted adults. Where I go.
Dr Strauss said I had something that was very good. He said I had a goodmotor-vation. I never even knowed I had that. I felt good when he said noteverbody with an eye-Q of 68 had that thing like I had it. I dont know whatit is or where I got it but he said Algernon had it too. Algernonsmotor-vation is the chees they put in his
 box. But it cant be only thatbecause I dint have no chees this week.Prof Nemur was worryd about my eye-Q getting too high from mine that was toolow and I woud get sick from it. And Dr Strauss tolld Prof Nemur somthing Idint understand so wile they was talking I rote down some of the words in mynotebook for keeping my progris riports.
He said Harold thats Prof Nemurs frist name I know Charlie is not what youhad in mind as the frist of your new breed of intelek** coudnt get the word*** superman. But most people of his low went" are host** and uncoop** theyare usally dull and apathet** and hard to reach. Charlie has a good natcherand hes intristed and eegerto pleese.
Then prof Nemur said remembir he will be the first human beeing ever to havehis intelijence increesd by sergery. Dr Strauss said thats exakly what Iment. Where will we find another retarted adult with this tremendusmotovation to lern. Look how well he has lerned to reed and rite for his lowmentel age. A tremendous achievement.
I dint get all the werds and they were talking to fast but it sounded likeDr Strauss and Burt was on my side and Prof Nemur wasnt.Burt kept saying Alice Kinnian feels he has an overwhelm" desir to lern. Heaktually beggd to be used. And thats true because I wantid to be smart. DrStrauss got up and walkd around and said I say we use Charlie. And Burtnoded. Prof Nemur skratchd his head and rubbd his nose with his thum and saidmabye your rite. We will use Charlie. But weve got to make him understandthat a lot of things can go wrong with the experamint.
When he said that I got so happy and exited I jumpd up and shaked his handfor being so good to me. I think he got skared when I did that.
He said Charlie we werked on this for a long time but only on animils likeAlgernon. We are sure thers no fisical danger for you but there are otherthings we cant tell untill we try it. I want you to understand this mite faleand then nothing woud happen at all. Or it mite even succeed temperary andleeve you werse off then you are now. Do you understand what that meens. Ifthat happins we will have to send you bak to the Warren state home to live.I said I dint care because I aint afraid of nothing. Im very strong and Ialways do good and beside I got my luky rabits foot and I never breakd amhrir in my life. I droppd some dishis once but that dont count for bad luk.Then Dr Strauss said Charlie even if this fales your making a gratecontribyushun to sience. This experimint has been successful on lots ofanimils but its never bin tride on a humen beeing. You will be the first.I told him thanks doc you wont be sorry for giving me my 2nd chance likeMiss Kinnian says. And I 'meen it like I tolld them. After the operashun Imgonna try to be smart. Im gonna try awful hard.

%%%%%Progris riport 6th Mar 8.Im skared. Lots of pepul who werk at the collidge and the pepul at themedicil school came to wish me luk. Burt the tester brot me some flowers hesaid they were from the pepul at the psych departmint. He wished me luk.I hope I have luk. I got my rabits foot and myluky penny and my horshoe. Dr Strauss said dont be so superstishus Charlie. Thisis sience. I dont no what sience is but they all keep saying it so mabyeits something that helps you have good luk. Anyway Im keeping my rabits footin one hand and my luky penny in the other hand with the hole in it. Thepenny I meen. I wish I coud take the horshoe with me to but its hevy so I'lljust leeve it in my jaket.
Joe Carp from the bakery brot me a chokilat cake from Mr Donner and thefolks at the bakery and they hope I get better soon. At the bakery they.think Im sick becaus thats what Prof Nemur said I shoud tell them andnothing about an operashun for getting smart. Thats a secrit until after incase it dont werk or something goes wrong.
Then Miss Kinnian came to see me and she brout me some magizenes to reed,and she lookd kind of nervus and skared. She fixd up the flowres on my tabeland put evrything nice and neet not messd up like I made it. And she fixd thepilow under my hed. She likes me alot becaus I try very hard to Ternevrything not like some of the pepul at the adult center who dont reely care.She wants me to get smart. I know.
Then Prof Nemur said I cant have any more visiters becaus I got to rest. Iaskd Prof Nemur if I coud beet Algernon in the race after the operashun andbe sayd mabye. If the operashun werks good I'll show that mouse I can be assmart as he is even smarter. Then I'll be abel to reed better and spell thewerds good and know lots of things and be like other pepul. Boy that woudserprise everyone. If the operashun werks and I get smart mabye I'll be abelto find my mom and dad and sister and show them. Boy woud they 'be serprisedto see me smart just like them and my sister.
Prof Nemur says if it werks good and its perminent they will make otherpepul like me smart also. Mabye pepul all over the werid. And he said thatmeens Im doing somthing grate for sience and I'll be famus and my name will godown in the books. I dont care so much about beeing famus. I just want to besmart like other pepul so I can have lots of frends who like me.They dint give me anything to eat today. I dont know what eating got to dowith geting smart and Im. hungry. Prof Nemur took away my choklate cake. ThatProf Nemur is a growch. Dr Strauss says I can have it back after theoperashun. You cant eat before a operashun. Not even cheese.

%%%%%PROGRESS REPORT 7 MARCH 11The operashun dint hert. Dr Strauss did it while I was sleeping. I dont knowhow because I dint see but there was bandiges on my eyes and my head for 3days so - I couldnt make no PROGRESS REPORT till today. The skinny nerse whowached me riting says I spelld PROGRESS rong and she tolld me how to spell itand REPORT to and MARCH. I got to remembir that. I have a very bad memary forspeling. Anyway they took off the bandiges from my eyes today so I can makea PROGRESS REPORT now. But there is still some bandigis on my head.I was skared when they came in and tolld me it was time to go for theoperashun. They maid me get out of the bed and on another bed that has weelson it and they rolld me out of the room and down the hall to the door thatsays sergery. Boy was I serprised that it was a big room with green walls andlots of docters sitting around up high all around the room waching theoperashun. I dint no it was going to be like a show.
A man came up to the tabel all in wite and with a wite cloth on his facelike in TV shows and rubber glovs and he said rilax Charlie its me DrStrauss. I said hi doc Im skared. He said theres nothing to be skared aboutCharlie he said youll just go to sleep. I said thats what Im skared about. Hepatted my head and then 2 other men waring wite masks too came and straped myarms and legs down so I coudnt move them and that maid me very skared and mystomack feeled tite like I was gone to make all over but I dint only wet alittel and I was gone to cry but they put a rubber thing on my face for me tobreeth in and it smelld funny. All the time I herd Dr Strauss talking outloud about the operashun telling evrybody what he was gonna do. But I dintunderstand anything about it and I was thinking mabyeafter the operashun I'll be smart and I'll understand all the things hestalking about. So I breethed deep and then I gess I was very tired becase Iwent to sleep.
When I waked up I was back in my bed and it was very dark. I coudnt seenothing but I herd some talking. It was the nerse and Burt and I said whatsthe matter why dont you put on the lites and when are they gonna operate. Andthey laffed and Burt said Charlie its all over. And its dark because you gotbandijis over your eyes.
Its a funny thing. They did it while I was sleeping.
Burt comes in to see me evry day to rite down all the things like mytempertur and my blud preshur and the other things about me. He says its onacount of the sientific methid. They got to keep reckerds about what happinsso they can do it agen when they want to. Not to me but to the other pepullike me who aint smart.
Thais why I got to do these pr-egie- progress reports. Burt says its part ofthe esperimint and they will make fotastats of the reports to study themso they will know what is going on in my mind. I dont see how they will knowwhat is going on in my mind by looking at these reports. I read them over andover a lot of times to see what I rote and I dont no whats going on in mymind so how are they going to.
But anyway thats sience and I got to try to be smart like other pepul. Thenwhen I am smart they will talk to me and I can sit with them and listen likeJoe Carp and Frank and Gimpy do when they talk and have a discushen aboutimportent things. While their werking they start talking about things likeabout god or about the truble with all the mony the presedint is spending orabout the ripublicans and demicrats. And they get all excited like theirgonna have a fite so Mr Donner got to come in and tell them to get back tobaking or theyll all get canned union or no union. I want to talk aboutthings like that.
If your smart you can have lots of fiends to talk to and you never getlonley by yourself all the time.
Prof Nemur says its ok to tell about all the things that happin to me in theprogress reports but he says I shoud rite more about what I feel and what I thinkand remember about the past. I tolld him I dont know how to think or remembirand he said just try.
All the time the bandiges were on my eyes I tryed to think and remembir butnothing happined. I dont know what to think or remembir about. Maybe if I askhim he will tell me how I can think now that Im suppose to get smart. What dosmart pepul think about or remembir. Fancy things I bet. I wish I new somefancy things alredy.
March 12 - I dont have to rite PROGRESS REPORT on topevry day just when I start a new batch after Prof Nemurtakes the old ones away. I just have to put the date on top. Thatsaves time. Its a good idea. I can sit up in bed andlook out the window at the gras and trees outside. Theskinney nerses name is Hilda and she is very good to me. Shebrings me things to eat and she fixes my bed and shesays I was a very brave man to let them do things to myhed. She says she woud never let them do things to herbranes for all the tea in china. I tolld her it wasnt for tea inchina. It was to make me smart. And she said mabey theygot no rite to make me smart because if god wantid me tobe smart he would have made me born that way. Andwhat about Adem and Eev and the sin with the tree ofnowlege and eating the appel and the fall. And mabeyProf Nemur and Dr Strauss was tampiring with things theygot no rite to tampir with.
She's very skinney and when she talks her face gets all red. She says mabeyI better prey to god to ask him to forgiv what they done to me. I dint eat noappels or do nothing sinful. And now Im skared. Mabey I shoudnt of let themoparate on my branes like she said if its agenst god. I dont want to make godangrey.
March 13 - They changed my nerse today. This one is pritty. Her name is Lucilleshe showd me how to spell it for my progress report and she got yellow hairand blew eyes. I askd her where was Hilda and she said Hilda wasnt werking inthat part of the hospitil no more. Only in the matirnity ward by the babyswhere it dont matter if she talks too much.When I askd her about what was matirnity she said itsabout having babys but when I askd her how they have them she got red in theface just the same like Hilda and she said she got to take sombodystemperchure. Nobody ever tells me about the babys. Mabye if this thing werksand I get smart I'll find out.
Miss Kinnian came to see me today and she said Charlie you look wonderful. Itolld her I feel fine but I dont feel smart yet. I thot that when theoperashun was over and they took the bandijis off my eyes Id be smart and noa lot of things so I coud read and talk about importent things like evryebodyelse.
She said thats not the way it werks Charlie. It comes slowley and you haveto werk very hard to get smart.
I dint no that. If I got to werk hard anyway what did I have to have theoperashun for. She said she wasnt sure but the operashun was to make it sothat when I did werk hard to get smart it woud stick with me and not be likeit was before when it dint stick so good.
Well I tolld her that made me kind of feel bad because I thot I was going tobe smart rite away and I coud go back to show the guys at the bakery howsmart I am and talk with them about things and mabye even get to be anassistint baker. Then I was gone to try and find my mom and dad. They woud beserprised to see how smart I got because my mom always wanted me too be smartto. Mabey they woudnt send me away no more if they see how smart I am. Itolld Miss Kinnian I would try hard to be smart as hard as I can. She pattidmy hand and said I no you will. I have fayth in you Charlie.

%%%%%PROGRESS REPORT 8March 15 - Im out of the hospitil but not back at werk yet. Nothing ishappining. I had lots of tests and differint kinds of races with Algernon. Ihate that mouse. He always beets me. Prof Nemur says I got to play thosegames and I got to take those tests over and over agen.Those amazes are stoopid. And those picturs are stoopid to. I like to drawerthe picturs of a man and woman but I wont make up lies about pepul.And I cant do the puzzels good.
I get headakes from trying to think and remembir so much. Dr Strausspromised he was going to help me but he dont. He dont tell me what to thinkor when I'll get smart. He just makes me lay down on a couch and talk.Miss Kinnian comes to see me at the collidge too. I tolld her nothing washappining. When am I going to get smart. She said you got to be pashentCharlie these things take time. It will happin so slowley you wont know itshappening. She said Burt tolld her I was comming along fine.I still think those races and those tests are stoopid and I think ritingthese progress reports are stoopid to.
March 16 - I ate lunch with Burt at the collidge resterant. They got all kindsof good food and I dont have to pay for it neither. I like to sit and wachthe collidge boys and girls. They fool around somtimes but mostly they talkabout all kinds of things just like the bakers do at Donners bakery. Burtsays its about art and polatics and riligon. I dont know what those thingsare about but I know riligon is god. Mom use to tell me all about him and thethings he done to make the werld. She said I shoud always love god and preyto him. I dont remembir how to prey to him but I think mom use to make meprey to him a lot when I was a kid that he shoud make me get better and notbe sick. I dont rimember how I was sick. I think it was about me not beingsmart.
Anyway Burt says if the experimint werks I'll be able to understand all thosethings the studints are talking about and I said do you think I'll be smartlike them and he laffed and said those kids arent so smart youll pass them asif their standing still.
He interduced me to alot of the studints and some of them look at me funnylike I dont belong in a collidge. I almost forgot and started to tell them Iwas going to be very smart soon like them but Burt intiruppted and he tolldthem I was cleaning the psych department lab. Later he explaned to me theirmussent be any publisity. That meens its a seecrit.
I dont reely understand why I got to keep it a seeerit. Burt says its incase theirs a faleure Prof Nemur dont want everybody to laff espeshully thepepul from the Weluberg foundashun who gave him the mony for the projekt. Isaid I dont care if pepul laff at me. Lots of pepul laff at me and theirmy frends and we have fun. Burt put his arm on my sholder and said its notyou Nemurs worryd about. He dont want pepul to laff at him.
I dint think pepul would laff at Prof Nemur because hes a sientist in acollidge but Bert said no sientist is a grate man to his colleegs and hisgradulate studints. Burt is a gradulate studint and he is a majer inpsychology like the name on the door to the lab. I dint know they had majersin collidge. I thot it was onley in the army.
Anyway I hope I get smart soon because I want to lern everything there is inthe werld like the collidge boys know. All about art and politiks and god.March 17 - When I waked up this morning rite away I thot I was gone to be smartbut Im not. Evry morning I think Im gone to be smart but nothing happins. Mabyethe experimint dint werk. Maby I wont get smart and I'll have to go liveat the Warren home. I hate the tests and I hate the amazeds and I hateAlgernon.
I never new before that I was dumber than a mouse. I dont feel like ritingany more progress reports. I forget things and even when I rite them in mynotbook sometimes I cant reed my own riting and its very hard. Miss Kinniansays have pashents but I feel sick and tired. And I get headakes all thetime. I want to go back to werk in the bakery and not rite pvegris- progressreports any more.
March 20 - Im going back to werk at the bakery. Dr Strauss told Prof Nemur itwas better I shoud go back to werk but I still cant tell anyone what theoperashun was for and I have to come to the lab for 2 hrs evry nite afterwerk for my tests and keep riting these dumb reports. They are going to payme evry week like for a part time job because that was part of thearraingment when they got the mony from the Welberg foundashun. I still dontknow what that Welberg thing is. Miss Kinnian explaned me but I still dontget it. So if I dint get smart why are they paying me to rite these dumbthings. If their gonna pay me I'll do it. But its very hard to rite.Im glad Im going back to werk because I miss my job at the bakery and all myfrends and all the fun we have.
Dr Strauss says I shoud keep a notbook in my pockit for things I remembir. AndI dont have to do the progress reports every day just when I think ofsomthing or somthing speshul happins. I told him nothing speshul ever happinsto me and it dont look like this speshul exper'tmint is going to happinneither. He says dont get discouriged Charlie because it takes a long timeand it happins slow and you cant notise it rite away. He explaned how it tooka long time with Algernon before he got 3 times smarter then he was before.Thats why Algernon beats me all the time in that amaze race because he hadthat operashun too. Hes a speshul mouse the 1st animil to stay smart so longafter the operashun. I dint know he was a speshul mouse. That makes itdiffrint. I coud probaly do that amazed faster then a reglar mouse. Maybesome day I'll beat Algernon. Boy woud that be somthing. Dr Strauss says thatso far Algernon looks like he mite be smart permanint and he says thats agood sine becaus we both had the same kind of operashun.
March 21 - We had a lot of fun at the bakery today. Joe Carp said hey lookwhere Charlie had his operashun what did they do Charlie put some brains in. Iwas going to tell him about me getting smart but I remembered Prof Nemursaid no. Then Frank Reilly said what did you do Charlie open a door the hardway. That made me laff. Their my frends and they really like me.Their is a lot of werk to catch up. They dint have anyone to clean out theplace because that was my job but they got a new boy Ernie to do thediliveries that I always done. Mr Donner said he decided not to fire him fora while to give me a chanse to rest up and not werk so hard. I told him I wasalright and I can make my diliveries and clean up like I always done butMr.Donner says we will keep the boy.
I said so what am I gonna do. And Mr Donner patted me on the shoulder andsays Charlie how old are you. I told him 32 years going on 33 my nextbrithday. And how long you been here he said. I told him I dint know. He saidyou came here seventeen years ago. Your Uncle Herman god rest his sole was mybest frend. He brout you in here and he askd me to let you werk here andlook after you as best I eoud. And when he died 2 years later and your motherhad you comited to the Warren home I got them to releese you on outside werkplacmint. Seventeen years its been Charlie and I want you to know that thebakery bisness is not so good but like I always said you got a job here forthe rest of your life. So dont worry about me bringing in somebody to takeyour place. Youll never have to go back to that Warren home.
I aint worryd only what does he need Ernie for to diliver and werk aroundhere when I was always deliviring the packiges good. He says the boy needsthe mony Charlie so Im going to keep him on as an aprentise to lern him to bea baker. You can be his asistent and help him out on diliverys when he needsit.
I never was a asistent before. Ernie is very smart but the other pepul inthe bakery dont like him so much. Their all my good fiends and we have lotsof jokes and laffs here.
Some times somebody will say hey lookit Frank, or Joe or even Gimpy. Hereally pulled a Charlie Gordon that time. I dont know why they say it butthey always lafl and I laff too. This morning Gimpy hes the head baker and hehas a bad foot and he limps he used my name when he shouted at Ernie becauseErnie losst a birthday cake. He said Ernie for godsake you trying to be aCharlie Gordon. I dont know why he said that. I never lost any packiges.I askd Mr Donner if I coud lern to be an aprentise baker like Ernie. I toldhim I coud lern it if he gave me a chanse.
Mr Donner looked at me for a long time funny because I gess I dont talk somuch most of the time. And Frank herd me and he laffed and lafed until MrDonner told him to shut up and go tend to his oven. Then Mr Donner said to metheirs lots of time for that Charlie. A bakers werk is very importint andvery complikated and you shoudnt worry about things like that.
I wish I coud tell him and all the other people about my real operashun. Iwish it woud reely work alredy so I coud get smart like evrybody else.March 24 - Prof Nemur and Dr Strauss came to my room tonight to see why I dontcome in to the lab like I am suppose to. I told them I dont want to racewith Algernon no more. Prof Nemur said I dont have to for a whilebut I shoud come in any way. He brout me a presint only it wasnt a presintbut just for lend. He said its a teeching mashine that werks like TV. Ittalks and makes picturs and I got to tern it on just before I go to sleep. Isaid your kidding. Why shoud I tern on a TV before I go to sleep. But ProfNemur said if I want to get smart I got to do what he says. So I toldhim I dint think I was goin to get smart anyway.
Then Dr Strauss came over and put his hand on my sholder and said Charlieyou dont know it yet but your getting smarter all the time. You wont notiseit for a while like you dont notise how the hour hand on a clock moves. Thatsthe way it is with the changes in you. They are happining so slow you canttell. But we can follow it from the tests and the way you act and talk andyour progress reports. He said Charlie youve got to have fayth in us and inyourself. We cant be sure it will be permanint but we are confidant that soonyour going to be a very intellijent young man.
I said okay and Prof Nemur showed me how to werk the TV that reely wasnt aTV. I askd him what did it do. First he lookd sore again because I asked himto explane me and he said I shoud just do what he told me. But Dr Strausssaid he shoud explane it to me because I was beginning to questien authorety. Idont no what that meens but Prof Nemur looked like he was going to bite hislip off. Then he explaned me very slow that the mashine did lots of things tomy mind. Somethings it did just before I fall asleep like teach me thingswhen Im very sleepy and a little while after I start to fall asleep I stillhear the talk even if I dont see the picturs anymore. Other things is at niteits suppose to make me have dreams and remembir things that happened a longtime ago when I was a very littel kid.
Its scary.
Oh yes I forgot. I asked Prof Nemur when I can go back to Miss Kinniansclass at the adult center and he said soon Miss Kinnian will come to thecollidge testing center to teach me speshul. I am glad about that. I dint seeher so much since the operashun but she is nice.
March 25 - That crazy TV kept me up all nite. How can I sleep with somethingyelling crazy things all night in my ears. And the nutty picturs. Wow. I dontknow what it says when Im up so how am I going to know when Im sleeping. Iasked Burt about it and he says its ok. He says my branes are lerning justbefore I got to sleep and that will help me when Miss Kinnian starts mylessons at the testing center. The testing center isnt a hospitil for animilslike I thougt before. Its a labortory for sience. I dont know what sience isexept Im helping it with this experimint.
Anyway I dont know about that TV. I think its crazy. If you can get smartwhen your going to sleep why do pepul go to school. I dont think that thingwill werk. I use to watch the late show and the late late show on TV all thetime before I went to sleep and it never made me smart. Maybe only certinmovies make you smart. Maybe like quizz shows.
March 26 - How am I gonna work in the daytime if that thing keeps waking me upat nite. In the middel of the nite I woke up and I coudnt go back to sleepbecause it kept saying remembir... remembir... remembir... So I thinkI remembird something. I dont remembir exackly but it was about Miss Kinnianand the school where I lerned about reading. And how I went their.A long time ago once I asked Joe Carp how he lerned to read and if I coudlern to read to. He laffed like he always done when I say something funny andhe says to me Charlie why waste your time they cant put any branes in wherethere aint none. But Fanny Birden herd me and she askd her cusin who is acollidge studint at Beekman and she told me about the adult center forretarded pepul at the Beekman collidge.
She rote the name down on a paper and Frank laffed and said dont go gettingso eddicated that you wont talk to your old frends. I said dont worry I willalways keep my old frends even if I can read and rite. He was laffing and JoeCarp was laffing but Gimpy came in and told them to get back to making rolls.They are all good frends to me.
After work I walked over six blocks to the school and Iwas scared. I was so happy I was going to lern to read that I bougt anewspaper to take home with me and read after I lerned.When I got their it was a big long hall with lots of pepul. I got scared ofsaying somthing wrong to sombody so I startid to go home. But I dont know whyI terned around and went inside agen.
I wated until most everbody went away exept some pepul going over by a bigtimeclock like the one we have at the bakery and I asked the lady if I coudlern to read and rite because I wanted to read all the things in thenewspaper and I showed it to her. She was Miss Kinnian but I dint know itthen. She said if you come back tomorow and rejister I will start to teachyou how to read. But you got to understand it will take a long time maybeyears to lern to read. I told her I dint know it took so long but I wantid tolern anyway because I made believe a lot of times. I meen I pretend to pepulI know how to read but it aint true and I wantid to lern.She shaked my hand and said glad to meet you Mistre Gordon. I will be yourteacher. My name is Miss Mnnian. So thats wear I went to lern and thats howI met Miss Kinnian.
Thinking and remembiring is hard and now I dont sleep so good any more. ThatTV is too loud.
March 27 - Now that Im starting to have those dreams and remembiring Prof Nemursays I got to go to theripy sesions with Dr Strauss. He says theripy sesionsis like when you feel bad you talk to make it better. I tolld him I dont feelbad and I do plenty of talking all day so why do I have to go to theripy buthe got sore and says I got to go anyway.
What theripy is is that I got to lay down on a couch and Dr Strauss sits ina chair near me and I talk about anything that comes into my head. For a longtime I dint say nothing because I coudnt think of nothing to say. Then I toldhim about the bakery and the things they do there. But its silly for me to goto his office and lay down on the couch to talk because I rite it down in theprogress reports anyway and he could read it. So today I brout the progressreport with me and I told him maybe he could just read it and I could take anap on the couch. I was very tired because that TV kept me up all nite buthe said no it dont work that way. I got to talk. So I talked but then I fellasleep on the couch anyway-rite in the middle.
March 28 - I got a headake. Its not from that TV this time. Dr Strauss showedme how to keep the TV turned low so now I can sleep. I dont hear a thing. AndI still dont understand what it says. A few times I play it over in themorning to find out what I lerned before I fell asleep and while I wassleeping and I dont even know the words. Maybe its another langwidge orsomething. But most times it sounds american. But it talks too fast.I askd Dr Strauss what good is it to get smart in my sleep if I want to besmart when Im awake. He says its the same thing and I have two minds. Theresthe SUBCONSCIOUS and the CONSCIOUS (thats how you spell it) and one dont tellthe other what its doing. They dont even talk to each other. Thats why Idream. And boy have I been having crazy dreams. Wow. Ever since that nightTV. The late late late late late movie show.
I forgot to ask Dr Strauss if it was only me or if everybody has two mindslike that.
I just looked up the word in the dicshunery Dr Strauss gave me:SUBCONSCIOUS. adj. Of the nature of mental operations yet not present inconsciousness; as, subconscious conflict of desires.) Theres more but I stilldont know what it meens. This isnt a very good dicshunery for dumb peoplelike me.
Anyway the headake is from the party. Joe Carp andFrank Reilly invited me to go with them after work toHallorans Bar for some drinks. I dont like to drink wiskeybut they said we will have lots of <ReadError> good time. We played games withme doing a dance on the the bar with a lampshade on my head and everyone laffing.Then Joe Carp said I shoud show the girls how I mop out the toilet in thebakery and he got me a mop. I showed them and everyone laffed when I toldthem that Mr Donner said I was the best janiter and errand boy he ever hadbecause I like my job and do it good and never come late or miss a day exeptfor my operashun.
I said Miss Kinnian always told me Charlie be proud of the work you dobecause you do your job good.
Everybody laffed and Frank said that Miss Kinnian must be some cracked uppiece if she goes for Charlie and Joe said hey Charlie are you making outwith her. I said I dint know what that meens. They gave me lots of drinks andJoe said Charlie is a card when hes potted. I think that means they like me. Wehave some good times but I cant wait to be smart like my best frends JoeCarp and Frank Reilly.
I dont remember how the party was over but they asked me to go around thecorner to see if it was raining and when I came back there was no onetheir. Maybe they went to find me. I looked for them all over till it was late. ButI got lost and I felt bad at myself for getting lost because I bet Algernoncoud go up and down those streets a hundrid times and not get lost like Idid.
Then I dont remember so good but Mrs Flynn says a nice poleecman brought meback home.
That same nite I dreamed about my mother and father only I coudnt see herface it was all wite and she was blurry. I was crying because we were in abig departmint store and I was losst and I coudnt find them and I ran up anddown the rows around all the big cownters in the store. Then a man came andtook me in a big room with benches and gave me a lolypop and tolld me a bigboy like me shoudnt cry because my mother and father woud come to find me.Anyway thats the dream and I got a headake and a big lump on my head andblack and blue marks all over. Joe Carp says mabye I got rolled or the coplet me have it. I dont think poleecmen do things like that. But anyway I dontthink I'll drink wiskey anymore.
March 29 - I beet Algernon. I dint even know I beet himuntil Burt Selden told me. Then the second time I lost because I got soexited. But after that I beet him 8 moretimes. I must be getting smart to beat a smart mouse likeAlgernon. But I dont feel smarter.
I wanted to race some more but Burt said thats enough for one day. He let mehold Algernon for a minit. Algernon is a nice mouse. Soft like cotton. Heblinks and when he opens his eyes their black and pink on the egos.I asked can I feed him because I felt bad to beat him and I wanted to benice and make fiends. Burt said no Algernon is a very speshul mouse with anoperashun like mine. He was the first of all the animals to stay smart solong and he said that Algernon is so smart he has to solve a problem with alock that changes every time he goes in to eat so he has to lem something newto get his food. That made me sad because if he coudnt lern he woudnt be ableto eat and he would be hungry.
I dont think its right to make you pass a test to eat How woud Burt like tohave to pass a test every time he wants to eat. I think I'll be frends withAlgernon.
That reminds me. Dr Strauss says I shoud write down all my dreams and thethings I think so when I come to his office I can tell them. I tolld him Idont know how to think yet but he says he means more things like what I wroteabout my mom and dad and about when I started school at Miss Kinnians oranything that happened before the operation is thinking and I wrote them inmy progress report.
I didnt know I was thinking and remembering. Maybe that means something ishappining to me. I dont feel different but I'm so exited I cant sleep.Dr Strauss gave me some pink pills to make me sleep good. He says I got toget lots of sleep because thats when most of the changes happin in my brane. Itmust be true because Uncle Herman use to sleep in our house all the timewhen he was out of werk on the old sofa in the parler. He was fat and it washard for him to get a job because he use to paint pepuls houses and he gotvery slow going up and down the ladder.
When I once tolld my mom I wantid to be a painter like Uncle Herman mysister Norma said yeah Charlies going to be the artist of the family. And dadslappd her face and tolld her not to be so goddam nasty to her brother. Idont no what a artist is but if Norma got slappd for saying it I gess its nota nice thing. I always feeled bad when Norma got slappd for being meen to me.When I get smart I'll go visit her.
March 30 - Tonite after werk Miss Kinnian came to the teeching room near thelabatory. She looked glad to see me but nervus. She looks yunger then Iremembired her.
I tolld her I was trying very hard to be smart. She said I have confidense inyou Charlie the way you strugled so much to reed and rite better then all theothers. I know you can do it. At werst you will have it all for a little wileand your doing somthing for other retarded pepul.
We startid to reed a very hard book. I never red such a hard book before. Itscalled Robinson Crusoe about a man who gets merooned on a dessert island. He'ssmart and figgers out all kinds of things so he can have a house and foodand hes a good swimmer. Only I feel sorry for him because hes all alone andhe has no frends. But I think their must be somebody else on the island becausetheres a picture of him with his funny umbrela looking at feetprints. I hopehe gets a frend and not be so lonely.
March 31 - Miss Kinnian teeches me how to spel better. She says look at a werdand close your eyes and say it over and over again until you remember. I havelots of truble with through that you say THREW and enough and tough that youdont say ENEw and TEW. You got to say SNUFF and TUFF. Tbats how I use to riteit before I started to get smart. Im mixd up but Miss Kinnian says dont worryspelling is not suppose to make sence.

%%%%%PROGRESS REPORT 9April 1 - Everbody in the bakery came to see me today where I started my newjob working by the dough-mixer. It happined like this. Oliver who works onthe mixer quit yesterday. I used to help him out before bringing the bags offlour over for him to put in the mixer. Anyway I dint know that I knew how towork the mixer. Its very hard and Oliver went to bakers school for one yearbefore he could learn how to be an assistint baker.
But Joe Carp hes my friend he said Charlie why dont you take over Oliversjob. Everybody on the floor came around and they were all laughing and FrankReilly said yes Charlie you been here long enough. Go ahead. Gimpy aint aroundand he wont know you tryed it. I was scared because Gimpy is thehead baker and he told me never to go near the mixer because I would gethurt. Everyone said do it exept Fannie Birden who said stop it why dont you leavethe poor man alone.
Frank Reilly said shut up Fanny its April fools day and if Charlie works onthe mixer he might fix it good so we will all have the day off. I said Icoudnt fix the mashine but I could work it because I been watching Oliverever since I got back.
I worked the dough-mixer and everybody was surprised espeshully FrankReilly. Fanny Birden got exited because she said it took Oliver 2 years tolearn how to mix the dough right and he went to bakers school. Bernie Batewho helps on the mashine said I did it faster then Oliver did and better. Nobodylaffed. When Gimpy came back and Fanny told him he got sore at me forworking on the mixer.
But she said watch him and see how he does it. They were playing him for anApril Fool joke and he foold them instead. Gimpy watched and I knew he wassore at me because he dont like when people dont do what he tells them justlike Prof Nemur. But he saw how I worked the mixer and he skratched his headand said I see it but I dont believe it. Then he called Mr Donner and told meto work it again so Mr Donner could see it.
I was scared he was going to be angry and holler at me so after I wasfinished I said can I go back to my own job now. I got to sweep out the frontof the bakery behind the counter. Mr Donner looked at me funny for a longtime. Then he said this must be some kind of April fools joke you guys areplaying on me. Whats the catch.
Gimpy said thats what I thought it was some kind of a gag. He limped allaround the mashine and he said to Mr Donner I dont understand it either butCharlie knows how to handle it and I got to admit it he does a better jobthen Oliver.
Everybody was crowded around and talking about it and I got scared becausethey all looked at me funny and they were exited. Frank said I told you thereis something peculier lately about Charlie. And Joe Carp says yeah I knowwhat you mean. Mr Donner sent everybody back to work and he took me out tothe front of the store with him.
He said Charlie I dont know how you done it but it looks like you finallylearned something. I want you to be carefull and do the best you can do. Yougot yourself a new job with a 5 doller raise.
I said I dont want a new job because I like to clean up and sweep anddeliver and do things for my friends but Mr Donner said never mind yourfriends I need you for this job. I dont think much of a man who dont want toadvance.
I said whats advance mean. He scratched his head and looked at me over hisglasses. Never mind that Charlie. From now on you work that mixer. Thatsadvance.
So now instead of delivering packiges and washing out the toilets anddumping the garbage. Im the new mixer. Thats advance. Tomorrow I will tellMiss Kinnian. I think she will be happy but I dont know why Frank and Joe aremad at me. I asked Fanny and she said never mind those fools. This is AprilFools day and the joke backfired and made them the fools instead of you.I asked Joe to tell me what was the joke that backfired and he said go jumpin the lake. I guess their mad at me because I worked the mashine but theydidnt get the day off like they thought. Does that mean Im getting smarter.April 3 - Finished Robinson Crusoe. I want to find out more about what happensto him but Miss Kinnian says thats all there is.
April 4 - Miss Kinnian says Im learning fast. She read some of my progressreports and she looked at me kind of funny. She says Im a fine person and I'llshow them all. I asked her why. She said never mind but I shouldnt feel badif I find out that everybody isnt nice like I think. She said for a personwho God gave so little to you did more than a lot of people with brains theynever even used. I said that all my friends are smart people and their good. Theylike me and they never did anything that wasnt nice. Then she gotsomething in her eye and she had to run out to the ladys room.
While I was sitting in the teaching room waiting for her I was wonderingabout how Miss Kinnian was a nice lady like my mother use to be. I think Iremember my mother told me to be good and always be friendly to people. Shesaid but always be careful because some people dont understand and they mightthink you are trying to make trouble.
That makes me remember when mom had to go away and they put me to stay inMrs Leroys house who lived next door. Mom went to the hospital. Dad said shewasnt sick or nothing but she went to the hospital to bring me back a babysister or a brother. (I still dont know how they do that) I told them I wanta baby brother to play with and I dont know why they got me a sister insteadbut she was nice like a doll. Only she cryd all the time.
I never hurt her or nothing.
They put her in a crib in their room and once I heard Dad say dont worryCharlie wouldnt harm her.
She was like a bundle all pink and screaming sometimes that I couldnt sleep. Andwhen I went to sleep she woke me up in the nighttime. One time when theywere in the kitchen and I was in my bed she was crying. I got up to pick herup and hold her to get quiet the way mom does. But then Mom came in yellingand took her away. And she slapped me so hard I fell on the bed.
Then she startid screaming. Dont you ever touch her again. Youll hurt her. She'sa baby. You got no business touching her. I dint know it then but Iguess I know it now that she thought I was going to hurt the baby because Iwas too dumb to know what I was doing. Now that makes me feel bad because Iwould never of hurt the baby.
When I go to Dr Straus office I got to tell him aboutApril 6 - Today, I learned, the comma, this is, a, comma (,) a period, with, atail, Miss Kinnian, says its, importent, because, it makes writing, better,she said, somebody, could lose, a lot, of money, if a comma, isnt in, theright, place, I got, some money, that I, saved from, my job, and what, thefoundation, pays me, but not, much and, I dont, see how, a comma, keeps, youfrom, losing it,But, she says, everybody, uses commas, so I'll, use them, too.April 7 - I used the comma wrong. Its punctuation. Miss Kinnian told me to lookup long words in the dictionary to learn to spell them. I said whats thedifference if you can read it anyway. She said its part of your education sofrom now on I'll look up all the words Im not sure how to spell. It takes a longtime to write that way but I think Im remembering more and more.
Anyway thats how come I got the word punctuation right. Its that way in thedictionary. Miss Kinnian says a period is punctuation too, and there are lotsof other marks to learn. I told her I thought she meant all the periods hadto have tails and be called commas. But she said no.
She said; You, got. to-mix?them!up: She showd? me" how, to mix! them; up,and now! I can. mix (up all? kinds of punctuation- in, my. writing! There"are lots, of rules; to learn? but. Im' get'ting them in my head:One thing? I, like: about, Dear Miss Kinnian: (thats~ the way? it goes; ina business, letter (if I ever go! into business?) is that, she: always; givesme' a reason" when-I ask. She"s a genius! I wish? I cou'd be smartlike-her;Punctuation, is? fun!
April 8 - What a dope I am! I didn't even understand what she was talkingabout. I read the grammar book last night and it explains the whole thing. ThenI saw it was the same way as Miss Kinnian was trying to tell me, but Ididn't get it. I got up in the middle of the night and the whole thingstraightened out in my mind.
Miss Kinnian said that the TV working, just before I fell asleep and duringthe night, helped out. She said I reached a plateau. That's like the flat topof a hill.
After I figured out how punctuation worked, I read over all my old progressreports from the beginning. Boy, did I have crazy spelling and punctuation!I told Miss Kinnian I ought to go over the pages and fix all the mistakes,but she said, "No, Charlie, Professor Nemur wants them just as they are. That'swhy he lets you keep them after they're photostated-to see your ownprogress. You're coming along fast, Charlie."That made me feel good. After the lesson I went down and played withAlgernon. We don't race any more.
April 10 - I feel sick. Not like for a doctor, but inside mychest it feels empty, like getting punched and a heartburn at the same time.I wasn't going to write about it, but I guess I got to, because it'simportant. Today was the first day I ever stayed home from work on purpose.Last night Joe Carp and Frank Reilly invited me to a party. There were lotsof girls and Gimpy was there and Ernie too. I remembered how sick I got lasttime I drank too much, so I told Joe I didn't want to drink anything. He gaveme a plain coke instead. It tasted funny, but I thought it was just a badtaste in my mouth.
We had a lot of fun for a while."Dance with Ellen," Joe said. "She'll teach you the steps." Then he winkedat her like he had something in his eye.She said, "Why don't you leave him alone?"He slapped me on the back. "This is Charlie Gordon, my buddy, my pal. He'sno ordinary guy-he's been promoted to working on the dough-mixing machine. AllI did was ask you to dance with him and give him a good time. What's wrong withthat?"
He pushed me up close against her. So she danced with me. I fell three timesand I couldn't understand why because no one else was dancing besides Ellenand me. And all the time I was tripping because somebody's foot was alwayssticking out.
They were all around in a circle watching and laughing at the way we weredoing the steps. They laughed harder every time I fell, and I was laughingtoo because it was so funny. But the last time it happened I didn't laugh. Ipicked myself up and Joe pushed me down again.Then I saw the look on Joe's face and it gave me a funny feeling in mystomach.
"He's a scream," one of the girls said. Everybody was laughing."Oh, you were right, Frank," choked Ellen. "He's a one man side show." Thenshe said, "Here, Charlie, have a fruit." She gave me an apple, but when I bitinto it, it was fake.
Then Frank started laughing and he said, "I told ya he'd eat it. C'n youimagine anyone dumb enough to eat wax fruit?"Joe said, "I ain't laughed so much since we sent him around the corner tosee if it was raining that night we ditched him at Halloran's."
Then I saw a picture that I remembered in my mind when I was a kid and thechildren in the block let me play with them, hide-and-go-seek and I was IT. AfterI counted up to ten over and over on my fingers I went to look for theothers. I kept looking until it got cold and dark and I had to go home.But I never found them and I never knew why.
What Frank said reminded me. That was the same thing that happened atHalloran's. And that was what Joe and the rest of them were doing. Laughingat me. And the kids playing hide-and-go-seek were playing tricks on me andthey were laughing at me too.
The people at the party were a bunch of blurred faces all looking down andlaughing at me."Look at him. His face is red.""He's blushing. Charlie's blushing.""Hey, Ellen, what'd you do to Charlie? I never saw him act like thisbefore.""Boy, Ellen sure got him worked up."I didn't know what to do or where to turn. Her rubbing up against me made mefeel funny. Everyone was laughing at me and all of a sudden I felt naked. Iwanted to hide myself so they wouldn't see. I ran out of the apartment. Itwas a large apartment house with lots of halls and I couldn't find my way tothe staircase. I forgot all about the elevator. Then, after, I found thestairs and ran out into the street and walked for a long time before I wentto my room. I never knew before that Joe and Frank and the others liked tohave me around just to make fun of me.
Now I know what they mean when they say "to pull a Charlie Gordon."I'm ashamed.And another thing. I dreamed about that girl Ellen dancing and rubbing upagainst me and when I woke up the sheets were wet and messy.
April 13 - Still didn't go back to work at the bakery. I told Mrs Flynn, mylandlady, to call and tell hf. Donner I'm sick. Mrs Flynn looks at me latelylike she's scared of me.
I think it's a good thing about finding out how everybody laughs at me. Ithought about it a lot. It's because I'm so dumb and I don't even know whenI'm doing something dumb. People think it's funny when a dumb person can't dothings the same way they can.
Anyway, now I know I'm getting a little smarter every day. I knowpunctuation, and I can spell good. I like to look up all the hard words inthe dictionary and I remember them. And I try to write these progress reportsvery careful but that's hard to do. I am reading a lot now, and Miss Kinniansays I read very fast. And I even understand a lot of the things I'm readingabout, and they stay in my mind. There are times when I can close my eyes andthink of a page and it all comes back like a picture.
But other things come into my head too. Sometimes I close my eyes and I seea clear picture. Like this morning just after I woke up, I was laying in bedwith my eyes open. It was like a big hole opened up in the walls of my mindand I can just walk through. I think its far back... a long time ago whenI first started working at Donner's Bakery. I see the street where the bakeryis. Fuzzy at first and then it gets patchy with some things so real they areright here now in front of me, and other things stay blurred, and I'm notsure...
A little old man with a baby carriage made into a pushcart with a charcoalburner, and the smell of roasting chestnuts, and snow on the ground. A youngfellow, skinny with wide eyes and a scared look on his face looking up at thestore sign. What does it say? Blurred letters in a way that don't make sense. Iknow now that the sign says DONNER'S BAKERY, but looking back in my memoryat the sign I can't read the words through his eyes. None of the signs makesense. I think that fellow with the scared look on his face is me.
Bright neon lights. Christmas trees and sidewalk peddlers. People bundled incoats with collars up and scarves around their necks. But he has no gloves. Hishands are cold and he puts down a heavy bundle of brown paper bags. He'sstopping to watch the little mechanical toys that the peddler winds up thetumbling bear, the dog jumping, the seal spinning a ball on its nose. Tumbling,jumping, spinning. If he had all those toys for himself he would be the happiestperson in the world.
He wants to ask the red-faced peddler, with his fingers sticking through thebrown cotton gloves, if he can hold the tumbling bear for a minute, but he isafraid. He picks up the bundle of paper bags and puts it on his shoulder. Heis skinny but he is strong from many years of hard work."Charlie! Charlie!... fat head barley!"
Children circle around him laughing and teasing him like little dogssnapping at his feet. Charlie smiles at them. He would like to put down hisbundle and play games with them, but when he thinks about it the skin on hisback twitches and he feels the way the older boys throw things at him.Coming back to the bakery he sees some boys standing in the door of a darkhallway.
"Hey look, there's Charlie!""Hey, Charlie. What you got there? Want to shoot some craps?""C'mere. We won't hurtya."But there is something about the doorway-the dark hall, the laughing, thatmakes his skin twitch again. He tries to know what it is but all he canremember is their dirt and piss all over his clothes, and Uncle Hermanshouting when he came home all covered with filth, and how Uncle Herman ranout with a hammer in his hand to find the boys who did that to him. Charliebacks away from the boys laughing in the hallway, drops the bundle. Picks itup again and runs the rest of the way to the bakery."What took you so long, Charlie?" shouts Gimpy from the doorway to the backof the bakery.
Charlie pushes through the swinging doors to the back of the bakery and setsdown the bundle on one of the skids. He leans against the wall shoving hishands into his pockets. He wishes he had his spinner.He likes it back here in the bakery where the floors are white withflour-whiter than the sooty walls and ceiling. The thick soles of his ownhigh shoes are crusted with white and there is white in the stitching andlace-eyes, and under his nails and in the cracked chapped skin of his hands.He relaxes here - squatting against the wall leaningback in a way that tilts his baseball cap with the D forward over his eyes. Helikes the smell of flour, sweet dough, bread and cakes and rolls baking. The oven iscrackling and makes him sleepy.
Sweet... warm... sleep...Suddenly, falling, twisting, head hitting against the wall. Someone haskicked his legs out from under him.That's all I can remember. I can see it all clearly, but I don't know why ithappened. It's like when I used to go to the movies. The first time I neverunderstood because they went too fast but after I saw the picture three orfour times I used to understand what they were saying. I've got to askDr Strauss about it.
April 14 - Dr Strauss says the important thing is to keep recalling memorieslike the one I had yesterday and to write them down. Then when I come intohis office we can talk about them.
Dr Strauss is a psychiatrist and a neurosurgeon. I didn't know that. Ithought he was just a plain doctor. But when I went to his office thismorning, he told me about how important it is for me to learn about myself sothat I can understand my problems. I said I didn't have any problems.He laughed and then he got up from his chair and went to the window. "Themore intelligent you become the more problems you'll have, Charlie. Yourintellectual growth is going to outstrip your emotional growth. And I thinkyou'll find that as you progress, there will be many things you'll want totalk to me about. I just want you to remember that this is the place for youto come when you need help."
I still don't know what it's all about, but he said even if I don'tunderstand my dreams or memories or why I have them, some time in the futurethey're all going to connect up, and I'll learn more about myself. He saidthe important thing is to find out what those people in my memories aresaying. It's all about me when I was a boy and I've got to remember whathappened.
I never knew about these things before. It's like if I get intelligentenough I'll understand all the words in my mind, and I'll know about thoseboys standing in the hallway, and about my Uncle Herman and my parents. Butwhat he means is then I'm going to feel bad about it all and I might get sickin my mind.
So I've got to come into his office twice a week now to talk about thethings that bother me. We just sit there, and I talk, and Dr Strausslistens. It's called therapy, and that means talking about things will makeme feel better. I told him one of the things that bothers me is about women. Likedancing with that girl Ellen got me all excited. So we talked about itand I got a funny feeling while I was talking, cold and sweaty, and a buzzinginside my head and I thought I was going to throw up. Maybe because I alwaysthought it was dirty and bad to talk about that. But Dr Strauss said whathappened to me after the party was a wet dream, and it's a natural thing thathappens to boys.
So even if I'm getting intelligent and learning a lot of new things, hethinks I'm still a boy about women. It's confusing, but I'm going to find outall about my life.
April 15 - I'm reading a lot these days and almost everything is staying in mymind. Besides history and geography and arithmetic, Miss Kinnian says Ishould start learning foreign languages. Prof. Nemur gave me some more tapesto play while I sleep. I still don't know how the conscious and unconsciousmind works, but Dr Strauss says not to worry yet. He made me promise thatwhen I start learning college subjects in a couple of weeks I won't read anybooks on psychology-that is, until he gives me permission. He says it willconfuse me and make me think about psychological theories instead of about myown ideas and feelings. But it's okay to read novels. This week I read TheGreat Gatsby, An American Tragedy, and Look Homeward, Angel. I never knewabout men and women doing things like that.
April 16 - I feel a lot better today, but I'm still angry that all the timepeople were laughing and making fun of me. When I become intelligent the wayProf. Nemur says, with much more than twice my IQ of 70, then maybepeople will like me and be my friends.
I'm not sure what IQ is anyway. Prof. Nemur said it was something thatmeasured how intelligent youwere-like a scale in the drugstore weighs pounds. But Dr Strauss had a bigargument with him and said an IQ didn't weigh intelligence at all. He said an IQ showedhow much intelligence you could get, like the numbers onthe outside of a measuring cup. You still had to fill thecup up with stuff.
When I asked Burt Seldon, who gives me my intelligence tests and works withAlgernon, he said that some people would say both of them were wrong andaccording to the things he's been reading up on, the IQ measures a lot ofdifferent things including some of the things you learned already and itreally isn't a good measure of intelligence at all.So I still don't know what IQ is, and everybody says it's somethingdifferent. Mine is about a hundred now, and it's going to be over a hundredand fifty soon, but they'll still have to fill me up with the stuff. I didn'twant to say anything, but I don't see how if they don't know what it is, orwhere it is - how they know how much of it you've got.Prof Nemur says I have to take a Rorschach Test the day after tomorrow. Iwonder what that is.
April 17 - I had a nightmare last night, and this morning, after I woke up, Ifree-associated the way Dr Strauss told me to do when I remember my dreams. Thinkabout the dream and just let my mind wander until other thoughts comeup in my mind. I keep on doing that until my mind goes blank. Dr Strausssays that it means I've reached a point where my subconscious is trying toblock my conscious from remembering. It's a wall between the present and thepast. Sometimes the wall stays up and sometimes it breaks down and I canremember what's behind it.
Like this morning.The dream was about Miss Kinnian reading my progress reports. In the dreamI sit down to write but I can't write or read any more. It's all gone. I getfrightened so I ask Gimpy at the bakery to write for me. But when Miss Kinnianreads the report she gets angry and tears the pages up because they've gotdirty words in them.
When I get home Prof. Nemur and Dr Strauss are waiting for me and they giveme a beating for writing dirty things in the progress report. When they leaveme I pick up the torn pages but they turn into lace valentines with blood allover them.
It was a horrible dream but I got out of bed and wrote it all down and thenI started to free associate.
Bakery... baking... the urn... someone kicking me... fall down... bloody allover... writing... big pencil on a red valentine... a little gold heart...a locket... a chain... all covered with blood... and he's laughing at me...The chain is from a locket... spinning around ..flashing the sunlightinto my eyes. And I like to watch it spin... watch the chain... allbunched up and twisting and spinning... and a little girl is watching me.Her name is Miss Kin - I mean Harriet."Harriet... Harriet... we all love Harriet."And then there's nothing. It's blank again.
Miss Kinnian reading my progress reports over my shoulder.Then we're at the Adult Center for the Retarded, and she's reading over myshoulder as I write my osishuns compositions.
School changes into P.S. 13 and I'm eleven years old and Miss Kinnian iseleven years old too, but now she's not Miss Kinnian. She's a little girlwith dimples and long curls and her name is Harriet. We all love Harriet. It'sValentines Day.I remember...I remember what happened at P.S. 13 and why they had to change my school andsend me to P.S. 222. It was because of Harriet.I see Charlie-eleven years old. He has a little goldcolor locket he oncefound in the street. There's no chain, but he has it on a string, and helikes to twirl the locket so that it bunches up the string, and then watch itunwind, spinning around with the sun flicking into his eyes.Sometimes when the kids play catch they let him play in the middle and hetries to get the ball before one of them catches it. He likes to be in themiddle - even if he never catches the ball - and once when Hymie Rothdropped the ball by mistake and he picked it up they wouldn't let him throwit but he had to go in the middle again.
When Harriet passes by, the boys stop playing and look at her. All the boyslove Harriet. When she shakes her head her curls bounce up and down, and shehas dimples. Charlie doesn't know why they make such a fuss about a girl andwhy they always want to talk to her (he'd rather play ball or kick-the-can,or ringo-levio than talk to a girl) but all the boys are in love with Harrietso he is in love with her too.
She never teases him like the other kids, and he does tricks for her. Hewalks on the desks when the teacher isn't there. He throws erasers out thewindow, scribbles all over the blackboard and walls. And Harriet alwaysscreeches and giggles, "Oh, lookit Charlie. Ain't he funny? Oh, ain't hesilly?"
It's Valentine's Day, and the boys are talking about valentines they'regoing to give Harriet, so Charlie says, "I'm gonna give Harriet a valentimetoo."
They laugh and Barry says, "Where you gonna get a valentine?""I'm gonna get her a pretty one. You'll see."But he doesn't have any money for a valentine, so he decides to give Harriethis locket that is heart-shaped like the valentines in the store windows. Thatnight he takes tissue paper from his mother's drawer, and it takes along time to wrap and tie it with a piece of red ribbon. Then lie takes it toHymie Roth the next day during lunch period in school and asks Hymie to writeon the paper for him.
He tells Hymie to write: "Dear Harriet, I think you are the most prettiestgirl in the whole world. I like you very much and I love you. I want you tobe my valentime. Your friend, Charlie Gordon."Hymie prints very carefully in large letters on the paper, laughing all thetime, and he tells Charlie, "Boy, this will knock her eyes out. Wait'll shesees this."
Charlie is scared, but he wants to give Harriet that locket, so he followsher home from school and waits until she goes into her house. Then he sneaksinto the hall and hangs the package on the inside of the doorknob. He ringsthe bell twice and runs across the street to hide behind the tree.When Harriet comes down she looks around to see who rang the bell. Then shesees the package. She takes it and goes upstairs. Charlie goes home fromschool and he gets a spanking because he took the tissue paper and ribbon outof his mother's drawer without telling her. But he doesn't care. TomorrowHarriet will wear the locket and tell all the boys he gave it to her. Thenthey'll see.
The next day he runs all the way to school, but it's too early. Harrietisn't there yet, and he's excited.But when Harriet comes in she doesn't even look at him. She isn't wearingthe locket. And she looks sore.
He does all kinds of things when Mrs Janson isn't watching: He makes funnyfaces. He laughs out loud. He stands up on his seat and wiggles his fanny. Heeven throws a piece of chalk at Harold. But Harriet doesn't look at him evenonce. Maybe she forgot. Maybe she'll wear it tomorrow. She passes by in thehallway, but when he comes over to ask her she pushes past him without sayinga word.
Down in the schoolyard her two big brothers are waiting for him.Gus pushes him. "You little bastard, did you write this dirty note to mysister?"
Charlie says he didn't write any dirty notes. "I just gave her a valentime."Oscar who was on the football team before he graduated from high schoolgrabs Charlie's shirt and tears off two buttons. "You keep away from my kidsister, you degenerate. You don't belong in this school anyway."He pushes Charlie over to Gus who catches him by the throat. Charlie isscared and starts to cry.
Then they start to hurt him. Oscar punches him in the nose, and Gus knockshim on the ground and kicks him in the side and then both of them kick him,one and then the other, and some of the other kids in the yard Charlie'sfriends -- come running screaming and clapping hands: "Fight! Fight! They'rebeating up Charliel"
His clothes are torn and his nose is bleeding and one of his teeth isbroken, and after Gus and Oscar go away he sits on the sidewalk and cries. Theblood tastes sour. The other kids just laugh and shout:"Charlie got a licking! Charlie got a licking!" And then Mr Wagner, one ofthe caretakers from the school, comes and chases them away. He takes Charlieinto the boys' room and tells him to wash off the blood and dirt from hisface and hands before he goes back home...
I guess I was pretty dumb because I believed what people told me. Ishouldn't have trusted Hymie or anyone.I never remembered any of this before today, but it came back to me after Ithought about the dream. It has something to do with the feeling about MissKinnian reading my progress reports. Anyway, I'm glad now I don't have to askanyone to write things for me. Now I can do it for myself.
But I just realized something. Harriet never gave me back my locket.April 18 - I found out what a Rorschach is. It's the test with the inkblots,the one I took before the operation. As soon as I saw what it was, I gotfrightened. I knew Burt was going to ask me to find the pictures, and I knewI wouldn't be able to. I was thinking, if only there was some way of knowingwhat kind of pictures were hidden there. Maybe there weren't any pictures atall. Maybe it was just a trick to see if I was dumb enough to look forsomething that wasn't there. Just thinking about it made me sore at him."All right, Charlie," he said, "you've seen these cards before, remember?""Of course, I remember."
The way I said it, he knew I was angry, and he looked up at me surprised."Anything wrong, Charlie?""No, nothing's wrong. Those inkblots upset me."He smiled and shook his head. "Nothing to be upset about. This is just oneof the standard personality tests. Now I want you to look at this card. Whatmight this be? What do you see on this card? People see all sorts of thingsin these inkblots. Tell me what it might be for you-what it makes you thinkof."
I was shocked. I stared at the card and then at him. That wasn't what I hadexpected him to say at all."You mean there are no pictures hidden in those inkblots?"Burt frowned and took off his glasses. "What?""Pictures! Hidden in the inkblots! Last time you told me that everyone couldsee them and you wanted me to find them too.""No, Charlie. I couldn't have said that."
"What do you mean?" I shouted at him. Being so afraid of the inkblots hadmade me angry at myself and at Burt too. "That's what you said to me. Justbecause you're smart enough to go to college doesn't mean you have to makefun of me. I'm sick and tired of everybody laughing at me."
I don't recall ever being so angry before. I don't think it was at Burthimself, but suddenly everything exploded. I tossed the Rorschach cards onthe table and walked out. Professor Nemur was passing by in the hall, andwhen I rushed past him without saying hello he knew something was wrong. Heand Burt caught up with me as I was about to go down in the elevator."Charlie," said Nemur, grabbing my arm. "Wait a minute. What is this allabout?"
I shook free and nodded at Burt. "I'm sick and tired of people making fun ofme. That's all. Maybe before I didn't know any better, but now I do, and Idon't like it."
"Nobody's making fun of you here, Charlie," said Nemur."What about the inkblots? Last time Burt told me there were pictures in theink-that everyone could see, and I-"
"Look, Charlie, would you like to hear the exact words Burt said to you, andyour answers as well? We have a tape-recording of that testing session. Wecan replay it and let you hear exactly what was said."I went back with them to the psych office with mixed feelings. I was surethey had made fun of me and tricked me when I was too ignorant to knowbetter. My anger was an exciting feeling, and I didn't give it up easily. Iwas ready to fight.
As Nemur went to the files to get the tape, Burt explained: "Last time, Iused almost the exact words I used today. It's a requirement of these teststhat the procedure be the same each time it's administered.""I'll believe that when I hear it"
A look passed between them. I felt the blood rush to my face again. Theywere laughing at me. But then I realized what I had just said, and hearingmyself I understood the reason for the look. They weren't laughing. They knewwhat was happening to me. I had reached a new level, and anger and suspicionwere my first reactions to the world around me.
Burt's voice boomed over the tape recorder:"Now I want you to look at this card, Charlie. What might this be? What doyou see on this card? People see all kinds of things in these inkblots. Tellme what it makes you think of... "
The same words, almost the same tone of voice he had used minutes ago in thelab. And then I heard my answers-childish, impossible things. And I droppedlimply into the chair beside Professor Nemur's desk. "Was that really me?"I went back to the lab with Burt, and we went on with the Rorschach. We wentthrough the cards slowly. This time my responses were different. I "saw"things in the inkblots. A pair of bats tugging at each other. Two men fencingwith swords. I imagined all sorts of things. But even so, I found myself nottrusting Burt completely any more. I kept turning the cards around, checkingthe backs to see if there was anything there I was supposed to catch.I peeked, while he was making his notes. But it was all in code that lookedlike this:

The test still doesn't make sense. It seems to me that anyone could make uplies about things he didn't really see. How could they know I wasn't makingfools of them by saying things I didn't really imagine?Maybe I'll understand it when Dr Strauss lets me read up on psychology. It'sgetting harder for me to write down all my thoughts and feelings becauseI know that people are reading them. Maybe it would be better if I could keepsome of these reports private for a while. I'm going to ask Dr.Strauss. Whyshould it suddenly start to bother me?

%%%%%PROGRESS REPORT 10April 21 - I figured out a new way to set up the mixing machines in the bakeryto speed up production. Mr Donner says he will save labor costs and increaseprofits. He gave me a fifty-dollar bonus and a ten-dollar-a-week raise.I wanted to take Joe Carp and Frank Reilly out to lunch to celebrate, butJoe had to buy some things for his wife, and Frank was meeting his cousin forlunch. I guess it will take time for them to get used to the changes in me.Everyone seems frightened of me. When I went over to Gimpy and tapped him onthe shoulder to ask him something, he jumped up and dropped his cup of coffeeall over himself. He stares at me when he thinks I'm not looking. Nobody atthe place talks to me any more, or kids around the way they used to. It makesthe job kind of lonely.
Thinking about it makes me remember the time I fell asleep standing up andFrank kicked my legs out from under me. The warm sweet smell, the whitewalls, the roar of the oven when Frank opens the door to shift the loaves.Suddenly falling... twisting ..everything out from under me and my headcracking against the wall.
It's me, and yet it's like someone else lying there-another Charlie. He'sconfused... rubbing his head, staring up at Frank, tall and thin, and thenat Gimpy nearby, massive, hairy, gray-faced Gimpy with bushy eye-browsthat almost hide his blue eyes."Leave the kid alone," says Gimp. "Jesus, Frank, why do you always gottapick on him?"
"It don't mean nothing," laughs Frank. "It don't hurt him. He don't know anybetter. Do you, Charlie?"Charlie rubs his head and cringes. He doesn't know what he's done to deservethis punishment, but there is always the chance that there will be more."But you know better," says Gimpy, clumping over on his orthopedic boot, "sowhat the hell you always picking on him for?" The two men sit down at thelong table, the tall Frank and the heavy Gimp shaping the dough for the rollsthat have to be baked for the evening orders.
They work in silence for a while, and then Frank stops and tips his whitecap back. "Hey, Gimp, think Charlie could learn to bake rolls?"Gimp leans an elbow on the worktable. "Why don't we just leave him alone?""No, I mean it, Gimp-seriously. I bet he could learn something simple likemaking rolls."
The idea seems to appeal to Gimpy who turns to stare at Charlie. "Maybe yougot something there. Hey, Charlie, come here a minute."As he usually does when people are talking about him, Charlie has beenkeeping his head down, staring at his shoelaces. He knows how to lace and tiethem. He could make rolls. He could learn to pound, roll, twist and shape thedough into the small round forms.
Frank looks at him uncertainly. "Maybe we shouldn't, Gimp. Maybe it's wrong. Ifa moron can't learn maybe we shouldn't start anything with him.""You leave this to me," says Gimpy who has now taken over Frank's idea. "Ithink maybe he can learn. Now listen, Charlie. You want to learn something?You want me to teach you how to make rolls like me and Frank are doing?Charlie stares at him, the smile melting from his face. He understands whatGimpy wants, and he feels cornered. He wants to please Gimpy, but there issomething about the words learn and teach, something to remember about beingpunished severely, but he doesn't recall what it is-only a thin white handupraised, hitting him to make him learn something he couldn't understand.Charlie backs away but Gimpy grabs his arm. "Hey, kid, take it easy. Weain't gonna hurt you. Look at him shaking like he's gonna fall apart. Look, Charlie- I got a nice new shiny good-luck piece for you to play with." Heholds out his hand and reveals a brass chain with a shiny brass disc thatsays STA-BRITS METAL POLISH. He holds the chain by one end and the gleaminggold disc rotates slowly, catching the light of the fluorescent bulbs. Thependant is a brightness that Charlie remembers but he doesn't know why or what.He doesn't reach for it. He knows you get punished if you reach out forother people's things. If someone puts it into your hand that is all right. Butotherwise it's wrong. When he sees that Gimpy is offering it to him, henods and smiles again.
"That he knows," laughs Frank. "Give him something bright and shiny." Frank,who has let Gimpy take over the experiment, leans forward excitedly. "Maybeif he wants that piece of junk bad enough and you tell him he'll get it if helearns to shape the dough into rollsmaybe it'll work."As the bakers set to the task of teaching Charlie, others from the shopgather around. Frank clears an area between them on the table, and Gimpypulls off a medium sized piece of dough for Charlie to work with. There istalk of betting on whether or not Charlie can learn to make rolls."Watch us carefully," says Gimpy, putting the pendant beside him on thetable where Charlie can see it. "Watch and do everything we do. If you learnhow to make rolls, you'll get this shiny good-luck piece."Charlie hunches over on his stool, intently watching Gimpy pick up the knifeand cut off a slab of dough. He studies each movement as Gimpy rolls out thedough into a long roll, breaks it off and twists it into a circle, pausingnow and then to sprinkle it with flour.
"Now watch me," says Frank, and he repeats Gimpy's performance. Charlie isconfused. There are differences. Gimpy holds his elbows out as he rolls thedough, like a bird's wings, but Frank keeps his arms close to his sides. Gimpykeeps his thumbs together with the rest of his fingers as he kneads thedough, but Frank works with the flat of his palms, keeping thumbs apart fromhis other fingers and up in the air.Worrying about these things makes it impossible for Charlie to move whenGimpy says, "Go ahead, try it."Charlie shakes his head.
"Look, Charlie, I'm gonna do it again slow. Now you watch everything I do, anddo each part along with me. Okay? But try to remember everything so then you'llbe able to do the whole thing alone. Now come on - like this."Charlie frowns as he watches Gimpy pull off a section of dough and roll itinto a ball. He hesitates, but then he picks up the knife and slices off apiece of dough and sets it down in the center of the table. Slowly, keepinghis elbows out exactly as Gimpy does, he rolls it into a ball.He looks from his own hands to Gimpy's, and he is careful to keep hisfingers exactly the same way, thumbs together with the rest of hisfingers-slightly cupped. He has to do it right, the way Gimpy wants him to doit. There are echoes inside him that say, do it right and they will like you. Andhe wants Gimpy and Frank to like him.
When Gimpy has finished working his dough into a ball, he stands back, andso does Charlie. "Hey, that's great. Look, Frank, he made it, into a ball."Frank nods and smiles. Charlie sighs and his whole frame trembles as thetension builds. He is unaccustomed to this rare moment of success."All right now," says Gimpy. "Now we make a roll." Awkwardly, butcarefully, Charlie follows Gimpy's every move. Occasionally, a twitch ofhis hand or arm mars what he is doing, but in a little while he is able totwist off a section of the dough and fashion it into a roll. Working besideGimpy he makes six rolls, and sprinkling them with flour he sets them carefullyalongside Gimpy's in the large flour-covered tray."All right, Charlie." Gimpy's face is serious. "Now, let's see you do it byyourself. Remember all the things you did from the beginning. Now, go ahead."Charlie stares at the huge slab of dough and at theknife that Gimpy has pushed into his hand. And onceagain panic comes over him. What did he do first? Howdid he hold his hand? His fingers? Which way did he rollthe ball?... A thousand confusing ideas burst into hismind at the same time and he stands there smiling. Hewants to do it, to make Frank and Gimpy happy andhave them like him, and to get the bright good-luck piecethat Gimpy has promised him. He turns the smooth,heavy piece of dough around and around on the table, but he cannot bring himselfto start. He cannot cut into it because he knows he will fail and he is afraid."He forgot already," said Frank. "It don't stick."He wants it to stick. He frowns and tries to remember: first you start tocut off a piece. Then you roll it out into a ball. But how does it get to bea roll like the ones in the tray? That's something else. Give him time andhe'll remember. As soon as the fuzziness passes away he'll remember. Justanother few seconds and he'll have it. He wants to hold on to what he'slearned-for a little while. He wants it so much."Okay, Charlie," sighs Gimpy, taking the cutter out of his hand. "That's allright. Don't worry about it. It's not your work anyway."Another minute and he'll remember. If only they wouldn't rush him. Why doeseverything have to be in such a hurry?"Go ahead, Charlie. Go sit down and look at your comic book. We got to getback to work."
Charlie nods and smiles, and pulls the comic book out of his back pocket. Hesmooths it out, and puts it on his head as a make-believe hat. Frank laughsand Gimpy finally smiles."Go on, you big baby," snorts Gimpy. "Go sit down there until Mr Donnerwants you."
Charlie smiles at him and goes back to the flour sacksin the corner near the mixing machines. He likes to leanback against them while he sits on the floor cross-leggedand looks at the pictures in his comic book. As he startsto turn the pages, he feels like crying, but he doesn'tknow why. What is there to feel sad about? The fuzzycloud comes and goes, and now he looks forward to thepleasure of the brightly colored pictures in the comicbook that he has gone through thirty, forty times. Heknows all of the figures in the comic-he has asked theirnames over and over again (of almost everyone hemeets)-and he understands that the strange forms ofletters and words in the white balloons above the figuresmeans that they are saying something. Would he everlearn to read what was in the balloons? If they gave himenough time-if they didn't rush him or push him toofast he would get it. But nobody has time.Charlie pulls his legs up and opens the comic book to the first page wherethe Batman and Robin are swinging up a long rope to the side of a building. Someday,he decides, he is going to read. And then he will be able to readthe story. He feels a hand on his shoulder and he looks up. It is Gimpyholding out the brass disc and chain, letting it swing and twirl around sothat it catches the light."Here," he says gruffly, tossing it into Charlie's lap, and then he limpsaway... .
I never thought about it before, but that was a nice thing for him to do. Whydid he? Anyway, that is my memory of the time, clearer and more completethan anything I have ever experienced before. Like looking out of the kitchenwindow early when the morning light is still gray. I've come a long way sincethen, and I owe it all to Dr Strauss and Professor Nemur, and the otherpeople here at Beekman. But what must Frank and Gimpy think and feel now,seeing how I've changed?
April 22 - People at the bakery are changing. Not only ignoring me. I can feelthe hostility. Donner is arranging for me to join the baker's union, and I'vegotten another raise. The rotten thing is that all of the pleasure is gonebecause the others resent me. In a way, I can't blame them. They don'tunderstand what has happened to me, and I can't tell them. People are notproud of me the way I expected-not at all.Still, I've got to have someone to talk to. I'm going to ask Miss Kinnian togo to a movie tomorrow night to celebrate my raise. If I can get up thenerve.
April 24 - Professor Nemur finally agreed with Dr Strauss and me that itwill be impossible for me to write down everything if I know it's immediatelyread by people at the lab. I've tried to be completely honest abouteverything, no matter who I was talking about, but thereare things I can't put down unless I can keep them private-at least for awhile.
Now, I'm allowed to keep back some of these more personal reports, but beforethe final report to the Welberg Foundation, Professor Nemur will read througheverything to decide what part of it should be published. What happened todayat the lab was very upsetting.
I dropped by the office earlier this evening to ask Dr Strauss or ProfessorNemur if they thought it would be all right for me to ask Alice Kinnian outto a movie, but before I could knock I heard them arguing with each other. Ishouldn't have stayed, but it's hard to break the habit of listening becausepeople have always spoken and acted as if I weren't there, as if they nevercared what I overheard.
I heard someone bang on the desk, and then Professor Nemur shouted: "I'vealready informed the convention committee that we will present the paper atChicago."
Then I heard Dr Strauss' voice: "But you're wrong, Harold. Six weeks fromnow is still too soon. He's still changing."And then Nemur: "We've predicted the pattern correctly so far. We'rejustified in making an interim report. I tell you, Jay, there's nothing to beafraid of. We've succeeded. It's all positive. Nothing can go wrong now."Strauss: "This is too important to all of us to bring it out into the openprematurely. You're taking the authority on yourself-"Nemur: "You forget that I'm the senior member of this project."Strauss: "And you forget that you're not the only one with a reputation toconsider. If we claim too much now, our whole hypothesis will come underfire."
Nemur: "I'm not afraid of regression any more. I've checked and recheckedeverything. An interim report will do no harm. I feel sure nothing can gowrong now."
The argument went on that way with Strauss saying that Nemur had his eye onthe Chair of Psychology at Hallston, and Nemur saying that Strauss was ridingon the coattails of his psychological research. Then Strauss said that theproject had as much to do with his techniques in psychosurgery andenzyme-injection patterns, as with Nemur's theories, and that somedaythousands of neurosurgeons all over the world would be using his methods, butat this point Nemur reminded him that those new techniques would never havecome about if not for his original theory.They called each other names-opportunist, cynic, pessimist-and I foundmyself frightened. Suddenly, I realized I no longer had the right to standthere outside the office and listen to them without their knowing it. Theymight not have cared when I was too feeble-minded to know what was goingon, but now that I could understand they wouldn't want me to hear it. I leftwithout waiting for the outcome.
It was dark, and I walked for a long time trying to figure out why I was sofrightened. I was seeing them clearly for the first time-not gods or evenheroes, but just two men worried about getting something out of their work.Yet, if Nemur is right and the experiment is a success, what does it matter?There's so much to do, so many plans to make.I'll wait until tomorrow to ask them about taking Miss Kinnian to a movie tocelebrate my raise.
April 26 - I know I shouldn't hang around the college when I'm through at thelab, but seeing the young men and women going back and forth carrying booksand hearing them talk about all the things they're learning in their classesexcites me. I wish I could sit and talk with them over coffee in the CampusBowl Luncheonette when they get together to argue about books and politicsand ideas. It's exciting to hear them talking about poetry and science andphilosophy-about Shakespeare and Milton; Newton and Einstein and Freud; aboutPlato and Hegel and Kant, and all the other names that echo like great churchbells in my mind.
Sometimes I listen in on the conversations at the tables around me, andpretend I'm a college student, even though I'm a lot older than they are. Icarry books around, and I've started to smoke a pipe. It's silly, but sinceI belong at the lab I feel as if I'm a part of the university. I hate to gohome to that lonely room.
April 27 - I've made friends with some of the boys at the Campus Bowl. Theywere arguing about whether or not Shakespeare really wrote Shakespeare'splays. One of the boys-the fat one with the sweaty face-said that Marlowewrote all of Shakespeare's plays. But Lenny, the short kid with the darkglasses, didn't believe that business about Marlowe, and he said thateveryone knew that Sir Francis Bacon wrote the plays because Shakespeare hadnever been to college and never had the educationthat shows up in those plays. That's when the one with the freshman beaniesaid he had heard a couple of guys in the men's room talking about howShakespeare's plays were really written by a lady.
And they talked about politics and art and God. I never before heard anyonesay that there might not be a God. That frightened me, because for the firsttime I began to think about what God means.
Now I understand one of the important reasons for going to college andgetting an education is to iearn that the things you've believed in all yourlife aren't true, and that nothing is what it appears to be.All the time they talked and argued, I felt the excitement bubble up insideme. This was what I wanted to do-go to college and hear people talk aboutimportant things.
I spend most of my free time at the library now, reading and soaking upwhat I can from books. I'm not concentrating on anything in particular, justreading a lot of fiction now-Dostoevski, Flaubert, Dickens, Hemingway, Faulkner- everything I can get my hands on feeding a hunger that can't be satisfied.April 28 - In a dream last night I heard Mom screaming at Dad and the teacherat the elementary school P.S. 13 (my first school before they transferred meto P.S. 222)...
"He's normal! He's normal! He'll grow up like other people. Better thanothers." She was trying to scratch the teacher, but Dad was holding her back."He'll go to college someday. He'll be somebody." She kept screaming it,clawing at Dad so he'd let go of her. "He'll go to college someday and he'llbe somebody."
We were in the principal's office and there were a lot of people lookingembarrassed, but the assistant principal was smiling and turning his head sono one would see it.
The principal in my dream had a long beard, and was floating around the roomand pointing at me. "He'll have to go to a special school. Put him into theWarren State Home and Training School. We can't have him here."Dad was pulling Mom out of the principal's office, and she was shouting andcrying too. I didn't see her face, but her big red teardrops kept splashingdown on me... .
This morning I could recall the dream, but now there's more than that-I canremember through the blur, back to when I was six years old and it allhappened. Just before Norma was born. I see Mom, a thin, dark-haired womanwho talks too fast and uses her hands too much. As always her face isblurred. Her hair is up in a bun, and her hand goes to touch it, pat itsmooth, as if she has to make sure it's still there. I remember that she wasalways fluttering like a big, white bird-around my father, and he too heavyand tired to escape her pecking.
I see Charlie, standing in the center of the kitchen, playing with hisspinner, bright colored beads and rings threaded on a string. He holds thestring up in one hand turns the rings so they wind and unwind in brightspinning flashes. He spends long hours watching his spinner. I don't know whomade it for him, or what became of it, but I see him standing therefascinated as the string untwists and sets the rings spinning... .She is screaming at him no, she's screaming at his father. "I'm not going totake him. There's nothing wrongwith him!"
"Rose, it won't do any good pretending any longer that nothing is wrong. Justlook at him, Rose. Six years old, and-""He's not a dummy. He's normal. He'll be just like everyone else."He looks sadly at his son with the spinner and Charlie smiles and holds itup to show him how pretty it is when it goes around and around."Put that thing away!" Mom shrieks and suddenly she knocks the spinner fromCharlie's hand, and it crashes across the kitchen floor. "Go play with youralphabet blocks."
He stands there, frightened by the sudden outburst. He cowers, not knowingwhat she will do. His body begins to shake. They're arguing, and the voicesback and forth make a squeezing pressure inside him and a sense of panic."Charlie, go to the bathroom. Don't you dare do it in your pants."He wants to obey her, but his legs are too soft to move. His arms go upautomatically to ward off blows.
"For God's sake, Rose. Leave him alone. You've got him terrified. You alwaysdo this, and the poor kid""Then why don't you help me? I have to do it all by myself. Every day I tryto teach him - to help him catch up to the others. He's just slow, that's all. Buthe can learn like everyone else.""You're fooling yourself, Rose. It's not fair to us or to him. Pretendinghe's normal. Driving him as if he were an animal that could learn to dotricks. Why don't you leave him alone?""Because I want him to be like everyone else."
As they argue, the feeling that grips Charlie's insides becomes greater. Hisbowels feel as if they will burst and he knows he should go to the bathroomas she has told him so often. But he can't walk. He feels like sitting downright there in the kitchen, but it is wrong and she will slap him.He wants his spinner. If he has his spinner and he watches it going roundand round, he will be able to control himself and not make in his pants. Butthe spinner is all apart with some of the rings under the table and someunder the sink, and the cord is near the stove.
It is very strange that although I can recall the voices clearly their facesare still blurred, and I can see only general outlines. Dad massive andslumped. Mom thin and quick. Hearing them now, arguing with each other acrossthe years, I have the impulse to shout at them: "Look at him. There, downthere! Look at Charlie. He has to go to the toilet!"Charlie stands clutching and pulling at his red checkered shirt as theyargue over him. The words are angry sparks between them-an anger and a guilthe can't identify.
"Next September he's going to go back to P.S. 13 and do the term's work overagain.""Why can't you let yourself see the truth? The teacher says he's not capableof doing the work in a regular class.""That bitch a teacher? Oh, I've got better names for her. Let her start withme again and I'll do more than just write to the board of education. I'llscratch that dirty slut's eyes out. Charlie, why are you twisting like that? Goto to the bathroom. Go by yourself. You know how to go.""Can't you see he wants you to take him? He's frightened.""Keep out of this. He's perfectly capable of going to the bathroom himself. Thebook says it gives him confidence and a feeling of achievement."The terror that waits in that cold tile room overwhelms him. He is afraid togo there alone. He reaches up for herhand and sobs out: "Toi- toi... " and she slaps his Ihand away. I"No more," she says sternly. "You're a big boy now. You can go by yourself. Nowmarch right into that bathroom and pull your pants down the way I taught you. Iwarn you if you make in your pants you'll get spanked."I can almost feel it now, the stretching and knotting in his intestines asthe two of them stand over him waiting to see what he will do. His whimperbecomes a soft crying as suddenly he can control no longer, and he sobs andcovers his face with his hands as he dirties himself.It is soft and warm and he feels the confusion of relief and fear. It ishis, but she will take it away from him as she always does. She will take itaway and keep it for herself. And she will spank him. She comes toward him,screaming that he is a bad boy, and Charlie runs to his father for help.Suddenly, I remember that her name is Rose and his name is Matt. It's odd tohave forgotten your parents' names. And what about Norma? Strange I haven'tthought about them all for a long time. I wish I could see Matt's face now,to know what he was thinking at that moment. All I remember is that as shebegan to spank me, Matt Gordon turned and walked out of the apartment.I wish I could see their faces more clearly.

%%%%%PROGRESS REPORT 11May 1 - Why haven't I ever noticed how beautiful Alice Kinnian is? She haspigeon-soft brown eyes and feathery brown hair down to the hollow of herneck. When she smiles, her full lips look as if she's pouting.We went to a movie and then to dinner. I didn't see much of the firstpicture because I was too conscious of her sitting next to me. Twice her barearm touched mine on the armrest, and both times the fear that she wouldbecome annoyed made me pull back. All I could think about was her soft skinjust inches away. Then I saw, two rows ahead of us, a young man with his armaround his girl, and I wanted to put my arm around Miss Kinnian. Terrifying. Butif I did it slowly... first resting my arm on the back of her seat... movingup... inch by inch... to rest near her shoulders and the back of herneck... casually...I didn't dare.
The best I could do was rest my elbow on the back of her seat, but by thetime I got there I had to shift position to wipe the perspiration off my faceand neck.
Once, her leg accidentally brushed against mine.It became such an ordeal -- so painful-that I forcedmyself to take my mind off her. The first picture hadbeen a war film, and all I caught was the ending wherethe G.I. goes back to Europe to marry the woman whosaved his life. The second picture interested me. A psychological film abouta man and woman apparently inlove but actually destroying each other. Everything suggests that the man isgoing to kill his wife but at the lastmoment, something she screams out in a nightmaremakes him recall something that happened to him duringhis childhood. The sudden memory shows him that hishatred is really directed at a depraved governess who hadterrified him with frightening stories and left a flaw in hispersonality. Excited at discovering this, he cries out withjoy so that his wife awakens. He takes her in his armsand the implication is that all his problems have been solved. It was patand cheap, and I must have shown my anger because Alice wanted to know whatwas wrong. "It's a lie," I explained, as we walked out into the lobby."Things just don't happen that way.""Of course not." She laughed. "It's a world of makebelieve.""Oh, no! That's no answer." I insisted. "Even in the world of make-believethere have to be rules. The parts have to be consistent and belong together. Thiskind of picture is a lie. Things are forced to fit because the writer orthe director or somebody wanted something in that didn't belong. And itdoesn't feel right."
She looked at me thoughtfully as we walked out into the bright dazzlingnight-lights of Times Square. "You're coming along fast.""I'm confused. I don't know what I know any more.""Never mind that," she insisted. "You're beginning to see and understandthings." She waved her hand to take in all of the neon and glitter around usas we crossed over to Seventh Avenue. "You're beginning to see what's behindthe surface of things. What you say about the parts having to belongtogether-that was a pretty good insight.""Oh, come on now. I don't feel as if I'm accomplishing anything. I don'tunderstand about myself or my past. I don't even know where my parents are,or what they look like. Do you know that when I see them in a flash of memoryor in a dream the faces are a blur? I want to see their expressions. I can'tunderstand what's going on unless I can see their faces-""Charlie, calm down." People were turning to stare. She slipped her armthrough mine and pulled me close to restrain me. "Be patient. Don't forgetyou're accomplishing in weeks what takes others a lifetime. You're a giantsponge soaking in knowledge. Soon you'll begin to connect things up, andyou'll see how all the different worlds of learning are related. All thelevels, Charlie, like steps on a giant ladder. And you'll climb higher andhigher to see more and more of the world around you."As we entered the cafeteria on Forty-fifth Street andpicked up our trays, she spoke animatedly. "Ordinarypeople," she said, "can see only a little bit. They can'tchange much or go any higher than they are, but you're a genius. You'll keepgoing up and up, and see more and more. And each step will reveal worlds younever even knew existed."
People on the line who heard her turned to stare at me, and only when Inudged her to stop did she lower her voice. "I just hope to God," shewhispered, "that you don't get hurt."For a little while after that I didn't know what to say. We ordered our foodat the counter and carried it to our table and ate without talking. Thesilence made me nervous. I knew what she meant about her fear, so I jokedabout it.
"Why should I get hurt? I couldn't be any worse off than I was before. EvenAlgernon is still smart, isn't he? As long as he's up there I'm in goodshape." She toyed with her knife making circular depressions in a pat ofbutter and the movement hypnotized me. "And besides," I told her, "Ioverheard something-Professor Nemur and Dr Strauss were arguing, and Nemursaid he's positive that nothing can go wrong."
"I hope so," she said. "You have no idea how afraid I've been that somethingmight go wrong. I feel partly responsible."
She saw me staring at the knife and she put it down carefully beside her plate."I never would have done it but for you," I said.She laughed and it made me tremble. That's when I saw that her eyes weresoft brown. She looked down at the tablecloth quickly and blushed."Thank you, Charlie," she said, and took my hand.It was the first time anyone had ever done that, and it made me bolder. Ileaned forward, holding on to her hand, and the words came out. "I like youvery much." After I said it, I was afraid she'd laugh, but she nodded andsmiled.
"I like you too, Charlie.""But it's more than liking. What I mean is ...oh, hell! I don't know whatI mean."I knew I was blushing, and I didn't know where to look or what to dowith my hands. I dropped a fork, and when I tried to retrieve it, I knockedover a glass of water and it spilled on her dress. Suddenly, I had becomeclumsy and awkward again, and when I tried to apologize I found my tonguehad become too large for my mouth."That's all right, Charlie," she tried to reassure me. "It's only water. Don'tlet it upset you this way."
In the taxi on the way home, we were silent for a long time, and then sheput down her purse and straightened my tie and puffed up my breast pockethandkerchief.
"You were very upset tonight, Charlie.""I feel ridiculous.""I upset you by talking about it. I made you selfconscious.""It's not that. What bothers me is that I can't put into words the way Ifeel.""These feelings are new to you. Not everything has to... be put intowords."I moved closer to her and tried to take her hand again, but she pulled away."No, Charlie. I don't think this is good for you. I've upset you, and itmight have a negative effect."When she put me off, I felt awkward and ridiculous at the same time. It mademe angry with myself and I pulled back to my side of the seat and stared outthe window. I hated her as I had never hated anyone before-with her easyanswers and maternal fussing. I wanted to slap her face, to make her crawl,and then to hold her in my arms and kiss her."Charlie, I'm sorry if I've upset you.""Forget it.""But you've got to understand what's happening.""I understand," I said, "and I'd rather not talk about it."By the time the cab reached her apartment on Seventyseventh Street, I wasthoroughly miserable."Look," she said, "this is my fault I shouldn't have gone out with youtonight.""Yes, I see that now.""What I mean is, we have no right to put this on a personal... emotionallevel. You have so much to do. I have no right to come into your life at thistime.""That's my worry, isn't it?""Is it? This isn't your private affair any more, Charlie. You've gotobligations now-not only to Professor Nemur and Dr Strauss, but to themillions who may follow in your footsteps."The more she talked that way, the worse I felt. She highlighted my awkwardness,my lack of knowledge about the right things to say and do. I was a blunderingadolescent in her eyes, and she was trying to let me down easy.As we stood at the door to her apartment, she turned and smiled at me andfor a moment I thought she was going to invite me in, but she just whispered:"Good night, Charlie. Thank you for a wonderful evening."I wanted to kiss her good night. I had worried about it earlier. Didn't awoman expect you to kiss her? In the novels I'd read and the movies I'd seen,the man makes the advances. I had decided last night that I would kiss her. ButI kept thinking: what if she turns me down?
I moved closer and reached for her shoulders, but she was too quick for me. Shestopped me and took my hand in hers."We'd better just say good night this way, Charlie. We can't let this getpersonal. Not yet."
And before I could protest, or ask what she meant by not yet, she startedinside."Good night, Charlie, and thank you again for a lovely... lovely time."And closed the door.I was furious at her, myself, and the world, but by the time I got home, Irealized she was right. Now, I don't know whether she cares for me or if shewas just being kind. What could she possibly see in me? What makes it soawkward is that I've never experienced anything like this before. How does aperson go about learning how to act toward another person? How does a manlearn how to behave toward a woman?
The books don't help much. But next time, I'm going to kiss her good night.May 3 - One of the things that confuses me is never really knowing whensomething comes up from my past, whether it really happened that way, or ifthat was the way it seemed to be at the time, or if I'm inventing it. I'm likea man who's been half-asleep all his life, trying to find out what he waslike before he woke up. Everything is strangely slow-motion and blurredI had a nightmare last night, and when I woke up I remembered something.First the nightmare: I'm running down a long corridor, half blinded by theswirls of dust. At times I run forward and then I float around and run backwards,but I'm afraid because I'm hiding something in my pocket. I don't know what it isor where I got it, but I know they want to take it away from me and that frightens me.The wall breaks down and suddenly there is a redhaired girl with her armsoutstretched to me - her face is a blank mask. She takes me into her arms,kisses and caresses me, and I want to hold her tightly but I'm afraid: Themore she touches me, the more frightened I become because I know I must nevertouch a girl. Then, as her body rubs up against mine, I feel a strangebubbling and throbbing inside me that makes me warm. But when I look up I seea bloody knife in her hands.I try to scream as I run, but no sound comes out of my throat, and mypockets are empty. I search in my pockets but I don't know what it is I'velost or why I was hiding it. I know only that it's gone, and there is bloodon my hands too.
When I woke up, I thought of Alice, and I had the same feeling of panic asin the dream. What am I afraid of? Something about the knife.I made myself a cup of coffee and smoked a cigarette. I'd never had a dreamlike it before, and I knew it was connected with my evening with Alice. Ihave begun to think of her in a different way.
Free association is still difficult, because it's hard not to control thedirection of your thoughts... just to leave your mind open and letanything flow into it... ideas bubbling to the surface like a bubble bath...a woman bathing... a girl... Norma taking a bath... I amwatching through the keyhole... and when she gets out of the tub to dryherself I see that her body is different from mine. Something is missing.Running down the hallway ..somebody chasing me... not a person...just a big flashing kitchen knifeand I'm scared and crying but no voice comes out because my neck is cut andI'm bleeding...
"Mama, Charlie is peeking at me through the keyhole .."Why is she different? What happened to her? Blood... bleeding... a darkcubbyhole...
Three blind mice... three blind mice, See how they runl See how they runtThey all run after the farmer's wife, She cut oft their tails with a carvingknife, Did you ever see such a sight in your life, As three... blind... mice?Charlie, alone in the kitchen early in the morning. Everyone else asleep,and he amuses himself playing with his spinner. One of the buttons pops offhis shirt as he bends over, and it rolls across the intricate line-pattern ofthe kitchen linoleum. It rolls towards the bathroom and he follows, but thenhe loses it. Where is the button? He goes into the bathroom to find it. Thereis a closet in the bathroom where the clothes hamper is, and he likes to takeout all the clothes and look at them. His father's things and his mother's ...and Norma's dresses. He would like to try them on and make believe he isNorma, but once when he did that his mother spanked him for it. There in theclothes hamper he finds Norma's underwear with dried blood. What had she donewrong? He was terrified. Whoever had done it might come looking for him...Why does a memory like that from childhood remain with me so strongly, andwhy does it frighten me now? Is it because of my feelings for Alice?Thinking about it now, I can understand why I was taught to keep away fromwomen. It was wrong for me to express my feelings to Alice. I have no rightto think of a woman that way - not yet. But even as I write these words,something inside shouts that there is more. I'm a person. I was somebodybefore I went under the surgeon's knife. And I have to love someone.May 8 - Even now that I have learned what has beengoing on behind Mr Donner's back, I find it hard to believe. I firstnoticed something was wrong during the rushhour two days ago. Gimpy was behind the counter wrapping a birthday cake forone of our regular customers-acake that sells for $3.95. But when Gimpy rang up thesale the register showed only $2.95. I started to tell himhe had made a mistake, but in the mirror behind the counter I saw a wink andsmile that passed from the customer to Gimpy and the answering smile on Gimpy'sface. And when the man took his change, I saw theflash of a large silver coin left behind in Gimpy's hand, before his fingersclosed on it, and the quick movement with which he slipped the half-dollarinto his pocket.
"Charlie," said a woman behind me, "are there any more of those cream-filledeclairs?""I'll go back and find out."I was glad of the interruption because it gave me time to think about whatI had seen. Certainly, Gimpy had not made a mistake. He had deliberatelyundercharged the customer, and there had been an understanding between them.I leaned limply against the wall not knowing what to do. Gimpy had workedfor Mr Donner for over fifteen years. Donner-who always treated his workerslike close friends, like relatives-had invited Gimpy's family to his housefor dinner more than once. He often put Gimpy in charge of the shop when hehad to go out, and I had heard stories of the times Donner gave Gimpy moneyto pay his wife's hospital bills.
It was incredible that anyone would steal from such a man. There had to besome other explanation. Gimpy had really made a mistake in ringing up thesale, and the half-dollar was a tip. Or perhaps Mr Donner had made somespecial arrangement for this one customer who regularly bought creamcakes. Anything rather than believe that Gimpy was stealing. Gimpy had alwaysbeen so nice to me.
I no longer wanted to know. I kept my eyes averted from the register as Ibrought out the tray of eclairs and sorted out the cookies, buns, and cakes.But when the little red-haired woman came in theone who always pinched my cheek and joked about finding a girl friend forme-I recalled that she came in mostoften when Donner was out to lunch and Gimpy was behind the counter. Gimpyhad often sent me out to deliverorders to her house.
Involuntarily, my mind totaled her purchases to $4.53. But I turned away sothat I would not see what Gimpy rang up on the cash register. Iwanted-y-know, the truth, and yet I was afraid of what I might learn."Two forty-five, Mrs Wheeler," he said.The ring of the sale. The counting of change. The slam of the drawer. "Thankyou, Mrs Wheeler." I turned just in time to see him putting his hand intohis pocket, and I heard the faint clink of coins.How many times had he used me as a go-between to deliver packages to her,undercharging her so that later they could split the difference? Had he usedme all these years to help him steal?I couldn't take my eyes off Gimpy as he clomped around behind the counter,perspiration streaming down from under his paper cap. He seemed animated andgood-natured, but looking up he caught my eye, frowned and turned away.I wanted to hit him. I wanted to go behind the counter and smash his facein. I don't remember ever hating anyone before-but this morning I hated Gimpywith all my heart.
Pouring this all out on paper in the quiet of my room has not helped. Everytime I think of Gimpy stealing from Mr.Donner I want to smashsomething. Fortunately, I don't think I'm capable of violence. I don't thinkI ever hit anyone in my life.But I still have to decide what to do. Tell Donner that his trusted employeehas been stealing from him all these years? Gimpy would deny it, and I couldnever prove it was true. And what would it do to Mr Donner? I don't knowwhat to do.
May 9 - I can't sleep. This has gotten to me. I owe Mr.Donner too much tostand by and see him robbed this way. I'd be as guilty as Gimpy by mysilence. And yet, is it my place to inform on him? The thing that bothers memost is that when he sent me on deliveries he used me tohelp him steal from Donner. Not knowing about it, I wasoutside it not to blame. But now that I know, by my silence I am as guilty ashe is.
Yet, Gimpy is a co-worker. Three children. What will he do if Donner fireshim? He might not be able to get another job-especially with his club foot.Is that my worry?What's right? Ironic that all my intelligence doesn't help me solve aproblem like this.May 10 - I asked Professor Nemur about it, and he insists that I'm an innocentbystander and there's no reason for me to become involved in what would be anunpleasant situation. The fact that I've been used as a gobetween doesn'tseem to bother him at all. If I didn't understand what was happening at thetime, he says, then it doesn't matter. I'm no more to blame than the knife isto blame in a stabbing, or the car in a collision."But I'm not an inanimate object," I argued. "I'm a person."He looked confused for a moment and then laughed. "Of course, Charlie. ButI wasn't referring to now. I meant before the operation."Smug, pompous -- I felt like hitting him too. "I was a person before theoperation. In case you forgot -- "
"Yes, of course, Charlie. Don't misunderstand. But it was different..."And then he remembered that he had to check some charts in the lab.Dr Strauss doesn't talk much during our psychotherapy sessions, but todaywhen I brought it up, he said that I was morally obligated to tellMr.Donner. But the more I thought about it the less simple it became. I had tohave someone else to break the tie, and the only one I could think of wasAlice. Finally, at ten thirty I couldn't hold out any longer. I dialed threetimes, broke off in the middle each time, but on the fourth try, I managed tohold on until her voice.
At first she didn't think she should see me, but Ibegged her to meet me at the cafeteria where we had dinner together. "Irespect you you've always given megood advice." And when she still wavered, I insisted."You have to help me. You're partly responsible. Yousaid so yourself. If not for you I would never have goneinto this in the first place. You just can't shrug me offnow."
She must have sensed the urgency because she agreed to meet me. I hung upand stared at the phone. Why was it so important for me to know what shethought, how she felt? For more than a year at the Adult Center the onlything that mattered was pleasing her. Was that why I had agreed to theoperation in the first place?
I paced up and back in front of the cafeteria until the policeman began toeye me suspiciously. Then I went in and bought coffee. Fortunately, the tablewe had used last time was empty. She would think of looking for me back there.She saw me and waved to me, but stopped at the counter for coffee before shecame over to the table. She smiled and I knew it was because I had chosen thesame table. A foolish, romantic gesture."I know it's late," I apologized, "but I swear I was going out of mymind. I had to talk to you."
She sipped her coffee and listened quietly as I explained how I had foundout about Gimpy's cheating, my own reaction, and the conflicting advice I'dgotten at the lab. When I finished, she sat back and shook her head."Charlie, you amaze me. In some ways you're so advanced, and yet when itcomes to making a decision, you're still a child. I can't decide foryou, Charlie. The answer can't be found in books-or be solved by bringing it toother people. Not unless you want to remain a child all your life. You've gotto find the answer inside you feel the right thing to do. Charlie, you've gotto learn to trust yourself."
At first, I was annoyed at her lecture, but then suddenly - it began to makesense."You mean, I've got to decide?"She nodded."In fact," I said, "now that I think of it, I believe I've already decidedsome of itl I think Nemur and Strauss are both wrong!"She was watching me closely, excitedly. "Something is happening toyou, Charlie. If you could only see your face.""You're damned right, something is happening! A cloud of smoke was hangingin front of my eyes, and with one breath you blew it away. A simpleidea. Trust myself. And it never occurred to me before.""Charlie, you're wonderful."I caught her hand and held it. "No, it's you. You touch my eye's and make mesee."
She blushed and pulled her hand back."The last time we were here," I said, "I told you I liked you. I should havetrusted myself to say I love you.""Don't, Charlie. Not yet.""Not yet?" I shouted. "That's what you said last time. Why not yet?""Shhhh... Wait a while, Charlie. Finish your studies. See where they leadyou. You're changing too fast."
"What does that have to do with it? My feeling for you won't change becauseI'm becoming intelligent. I'll only love you more.""But you're changing emotionally too. In a peculiar sense I'm the firstwoman you've ever been really aware of-in this way. Up to now I've been yourteacher, someone you turn to for help and advice. You're bound to think you'rein love with me. See other women. Give yourself more time.""What you're saying is that young boys are always falling in love with theirteachers, and that emotionally I'm still just a boy.""You're twisting my words around. No, I don't think of you as a boy.""Emotionally retarded then."
"No.""Then, why?""Charlie, don't push me. I don't know. Already, you've gone beyond myintellectual reach. In a few months or even weeks, you'll be a differentperson. When you mature intellectually, we may not be able to communicate. Whenyou mature emotionally, you may not even want me. I've got to think ofmyself too, Charlie. Let's wait and see. Be patient."She was making sense, but I wasn't letting myself listen."The other night --" I choked out, "You don't know how much I looked forward tothat date. I was out of my mind wondering how to behave, what to say, wanting tomake the best impression, and terrified I might say some. thing to make youangry."
"You didn't make me angry. I was flattered.""Then, when can I see you again?""I have no right to let you get involved.""But I am involved!" I shouted, and then seeing people turn to look, Ilowered my voice until it trembled with anger. "I'm a person-a man-and Ican't live with just books and tapes and electronic mazes. You say, `seeother women.' How can I when I don't know any other women? Something insideis burning me up, and all I know is it makes me think of you. I'm in the middle of apage and I see your face on it not blurred like those inmy past, but clear and alive. I touch the page and yourface is gone and I want to tear the book apart and throwit away."
"Please, Charlie..""Let me see you again""Tomorrow at the lab.""You know that's not what I mean. Away from the lab. Away from theuniversity. Alone."I could tell she wanted to say yes. She was surprised by my insistence. Iwas surprised at myself. I only knew that I couldn't stop pressing her. Andyet there was a terror in my throat as I begged her. My palms were damp. WasI afraid she'd say no, or afraid she'd say yes? If she hadn't broken thetension by answering me, I think I would have fainted."All right, Charlie. Away from the lab and the university, but not alone. Idon't think we should be alone together."
"Anywhere you say," I gasped. "Just so I can be with you and not think oftests... statistics... questions... answers... "She frowned for a moment. "All right. They have free spring concerts inCentral Park. Next week you can take me to one of the concerts."When we got to her doorway, she turned quickly and kissed my cheek. "Goodnight, Charlie. I'm glad you called me. I'll see you at the lab."She closed the door and I stood outside the building and looked at thelight in her apartment window until it went out.
There is no question about it now. I'm in love.
May 11 - After all this thinking and worrying, I realized Alice was right. Ihad to trust my intuition. At the bakery, I watched Gimpy more closely. Threetimes today, I saw him undercharging customers and pocketing his portion ofthe difference as the customers passed money back to him. It was only withcertain regular customers that he did it, and it occurred to me 'that thesepeople were as guilty as he. Without their agreement this could never takeplace. Why should Gimpy be the scapegoat?That's when I decided on the compromise. It might not be the perfect decision,but it was my decision, and it seemed to be the bestanswer under the circumstances. I would tell Gimpy what I knew and warn himto stop.
I got him alone back by the washroom, and when I came up to him he startedaway. "I've got something important to talk to you about," I said. "I wantyour advice for a friend who has a problem. He's discovered that one of hisfellow employees is cheating his boss, and he doesn't know what to do aboutit. He doesn't like the idea of informing and getting the guy into trouble,but he won't stand by and let his boss-who has been good to both of them-becheated."
Gimpy looked at me hard. "What does this friend of yours plan to do aboutit?""That's the trouble. He doesn't want to do anything. He feels if thestealing stops there would be nothing gained by doing anything at all. Hewould forget about it.""Your friend ought to keep his nose in his own business," said Gimpy,shifting off his club foot. "He ought to keep his eyes closed to things likethat and know who his friends are. A boss is a boss, and working people gotto stick together."
"My friend doesn't feel that way.""It's none of his business.""He feels that if he knows about it he's partly responsible. So he's decidedthat if the thing stops, he's got nothing more to say. Otherwise, he'll tellthe whole story. I wanted to ask your opinion. Do you think that under thecircumstances the stealing will stop?"It was a strain for him to conceal his anger. I could see that he wanted tohit me, but he just kept squeezing his fist."Tell your friend the guy doesn't seem to have any choice. ""That's fine," I said. "That will make my friend very happy."Gimpy started away, and then he paused and looked back."Your friend-could it be maybe he's interested in a cut? Is that his reason?""No, he just wants the whole thing to stop"He glared at me. "I can tell you, you'll be sorry you stuck your nose in. Ialways stood up for you. I should of had my head examined." And then helimped off.
Perhaps I ought to have told Donner the whole story and had Gimpy fired-Idon't know. Doing it this way has something to be said for it. It's over anddone with. But how many people are there like Gimpy who use other people thatway?
May 15 - My studies are going well. The university library is my second homenow. They've had to get me aprivate room because it takes me only a second to absorbthe printed page, and curious students invariably gatheraround me as I flip through my books.My most absorbing interests at the present time are etymologies of ancientlanguages, the newer works on the calculus of variations, and Hindu history. It'samazing the way things, apparently disconnected, hang together. I'vemoved up to another plateau, and now the streams of the various disciplinesseem to be closer to each other as if they flow from a single source.Strange how when I'm in the college cafeteria and hear the students arguingabout history or politics or religion, it all seems so childish.I find no pleasure in discussing ideas any more on suchan elementary level. People resent being shown that theydon't approach the complexities of the problem theydon't know what exists beyond the surface ripples. It'sjust as bad on a higher level, and I've given up any attempt to discuss thesethings with the professors at Beekman.
Burt introduced me to an economics professor at the faculty cafeteria, onewell known for his work on the economic factors affecting interest rates. Ihad long wanted to talk to an economist about some of the ideas I had comeacross in my reading. The moral aspects of the military blockade as a weaponin times of peace had been bothering me. I asked him what he thought of thesuggestion by some senators that we begin using such tactics as"blacklisting" and reinforcement of the navicert controls that had been usedin World Wars I and II, against some of the smaller nations which now opposeus.
He listened quietly, staring off into space, and I assumed he wascollecting his thoughts for an answer, but afew minutes later he cleared his throat and shook hishead. That, he explained apologetically, was outside hisarea of specialization. His interest was in interest rates, and he hadn't givenmilitary economics much thought. He suggested I see Dr Wessey, who once did apaper on War Trade Agreements during World War II. He might be able to help me.Before I could say anything else, he grabbed my hand and shook it. He hadbeen glad to meet me, but there were some notes he had to assemble for alecture. And then he was gone.
The same thing happened when I tried to discuss Chaucer with an Americanliterature specialist, questioned an Orientalist about the TrobriandIslanders, and tried to focus on the problems of automation-causedunemployment with a social psychologist who specialized in public opinion pollson adolescent behavior. They would always find excuses to slip away, afraidto reveal the narrowness of their knowledge.
How different they seem to be now. And how foolish I was ever to havethought that professors were intellectual giants. They're people-and afraidthe rest of the world will find out. And Alice is a person too-a woman, nota goddess-and I'm taking her to the concert tomorrow night.May 17 - Almost morning and I can't fall asleep. I've gotto understand what happened to me last night at the concert.
The evening started out well enough. The Mall at Central Park had filled upearly, and Alice and I had to pickour way among the couples stretched out on the grass. Finally, far back fromthe path, we found an unused treewhere-out of the range of lamplight the only evidenceof other couples was the protesting female laughter andthe glow of lit cigarettes."This will be fine," she said. "No reason to be right on top of theorchestra."
"What's that they're playing now?" I asked."Debussy's La Mer. Do you like it?"I settled down beside her. "I don't know much about this kind of music. Ihave to think about it.""Don't think about it," she whispered. "Feel it. Let it sweep over you likethe sea without trying to understand." She lay back on the grass and turnedher face in the direction of the music.I had no way of knowing what she expected of me. This was far from the clearlines of problem-solving and the systematic acquisition of knowledge. I kepttelling myself that the sweating palms; the tightness in my chest, the desireto put my arms around her were merely biochemical reactions. I even traced thepattern of stimulus - and - reaction that caused my nervousness andexcitement. Yet everything was fuzzy and uncertain. Should I put my arm aroundher or not? Was she waiting for me to do it? Would she get angry? I could tellI was still behaving like an adolescent and it angered me.
"Here," I choked, "why don't you make yourself more comfortable? Rest on myshoulder." She let me put my arm around her, but she didn't look at me. Sheseemed to be too absorbed in the music to realize what I was doing. Did shewant me to hold her that way, or was she merely tolerating it? As I slippedmy arm down to her waist, I felt her tremble, but still she kept staring inthe direction of the orchestra. She was pretending to be concentrating on themusic so that she wouldn't have to respond to me. She didn't want to knowwhat was happening. As long as she looked away, and listened, she couldpretend that my closeness, my arms around her, were without her knowledge orconsent. She wanted me to make love to her body while she kept her mind onhigher things. I reached over roughly and turned her chin. "Why don't youlook at me? Are you pretending I don't exist?"
"No, Charlie," she whispered. "I'm pretending I don't exist."When I touched her shoulder she stiffened and trembled, but I pulled hertoward me. Then it happened. It started as a hollow buzzing in my ears...an electric saw... far away. Then the cold: arms and legs prickly, andfinger numbing. Suddenly, I had the feeling I was being watched.A sharp switch in perception. I saw, from some point in the darkness behinda tree, the two of us lying in each other's arms.I looked up to see a boy of fifteen or sixteen, crouching nearby. "Hey!" Ishouted. As he stood up, I saw his trousers were open and he was exposed."What's the matter?" she gasped.
I jumed up, and he vanished into the darkness. "Did you see him?""No," she said, smoothing her skirt nervously. "I didn't see anyone.""Standing right here. Watching us. Close enough to touch you.""Charlie, where are you going?""He couldn't have gotten very far.""Leave him alone, Charlie. It doesn't matter."
But it mattered to me. I ran into the darkness, stumbling over startledcouples, but there was no way to tell where he had gone.The more I thought about him, the worse became the queasy feeling that comesbefore fainting. Lost and alone in a great wilderness. And then I caught holdof myself and found my way back to where Alice was sitting."Did you find him?"
"No, but he was there. I saw him."She looked at me strangely. "Are you all right?""I will be... in a minute... Just that damned buzzing in my ears.""Maybe we'd better go"All the way back to her apartment, it was on my mind that the boy had beencrouching there in the darkness, and for one second I had caught a glimpse ofwhat he was seeing-the two of us lying in each other's arms."Would you like to come in? I could make some coffee."
I wanted to, but something warned me against it. "Better not. I've got a lotof work to do tonight.""Charlie, is it anything I said or did?""Of course not. Just that kid watching us upset me."She was standing close to me, waiting for me to kiss her. I put my armaround her, but it happened again. If I didn't get away quickly, I would passout"Charlie, you look sick.""Did you see him, Alice? The truth ..She shook her head. "No. It was too dark. But I'm sure -- ""I've got to go. I'll call you."And before she could stop me, I pulled away. I had to get out of thatbuilding before everything caved in.Thinking about it now, I'm certain it was a hallucination. Dr Strauss feelsthat emotionally I'm still in that adolescent state where being close to awoman, or thinking of sex, sets off anxiety, panic, even hallucinations. Hefeels that my rapid intellectual development has deceived me into thinking Icould live a normal emotional life. But I've got to accept the fact that thefears and blocks triggered in thesesexual situations reveal that emotionallyI'm still an adolescent sexually retarded. I guess hemeans I'm not ready for a relationship with a woman likeAlice Kinnian. Not yet.
May 20 - I've been fired from my job at the bakery. I know it was foolish of meto hang on to the past, but there was something about the place with itswhite brick walls browned by oven heat... It was home to me. What did I do tomake them hate me so?
I can't blame Donner. He's got to think of his business, and the otheremployees. And yet, he's been closer to me than a father.He called me into his office, cleared the statements and bills off thesolitary chair beside his roll-top desk, and without looking up at me, hesaid, "I've been meaning to talk to you. Now is as good a time as any."It seems foolish now, but as I sat there staring at him -- short, chubby, withthe ragged light-brown moustache comically drooping over his upper lip-it wasas if both of me, the old Charlie and the new, were sitting on that chair,frightened at what Old Mr Donner was going to say."Charlie, your Uncle Herman was a good friend of mine. I kept my promise tohim to keep you on the job, good times and bad, so that you didn't ever wantfor a dollar in your pocket and a place to lay your head without being putaway in that home."
"The bakery is my home - ""And I treated you like my own son who gave up his life for his country. Andwhen Herman died-how old were you? seventeen? more like a six-year-old boy-Iswore to myself... I said, Arthur Donner, as long as you got a bakery anda business over your head, you're going to look after Charlie. He is going tohave a place to work, a bed to sleep in, and bread in his mouth. When theycommitted you to that Warren place, I told them how you would work for me,and I would take care of you. You didn't spend even one night in that place. Igot you a room and I looked after you. Now, have I kept that solemn promise?"I nodded, but I could see by the way he was folding and unfolding his billsthat he was having trouble. And as much as I didn't want to know-I knew. "I'vetried my best to do a good job. I've worked hard..."
"I know, Charlie. Nothing's wrong with your work. But something happened toyou, and I don't understand what it means. Not only me. Everyone has beentalking about it. I've had them in here a dozen times in the last fewweeks. They're all upset. Charlie, I got to let you go.I tried to stop him but he shook his head.
"There was a delegation in to see me last night. Charlie, I got my businessto hold together."
He was staring at his hands, turning the paper over and over as if he hopedto find something on it that was not there before. "I'm sorry, Charlie.""But where will I go?"
He peered up at me for the first time since we'd walked into his cubbyholeoffice. "You know as well as I do that you don't need to work here any more.""Mr Donner, I've never worked anywhere else."
"Let's face it. You're not the Charlie who came in here seventeen yearsago-not even the same Charlie of four months ago. You haven't talked aboutit. It's your own affair. Maybe a miracle of some kind-who knows? But you'vechanged into a very smart young man. And operating the dough mixer anddelivering packages is no work for a smart young man."He was right, of course, but something inside me wanted to make him changehis mind.
"You've got to let me stay, Mr Donner. Give me another chance. You saidyourself that you promised Uncle Herman I would have a job here for as longas I needed it. Well, I still need it, Mr Donner.""You don't, Charlie. If you did then I'd tell them I don't care about theirdelegations and their petitions, and I'd stick up for you against all ofthem. But as it is now, they're all scared to death of you. I got to think ofmy own family too."
"What if they change their minds? Let me try to convince them." I was makingit harder for him than he expected. I knew I should stop, but I couldn'tcontrol myself. "I'll make them understand," I pleaded."All right," he sighed finally. "Go ahead, try. But you're only going tohurt yourself."
As I came out of his office, Frank Reilly and Joe Carp walked by me, and I knewwhat he had said was true. Having me around to lookat was too much for them. I made them all uncomfortable.Frank had just picked up a tray of rolls and both he and Joe turned when Icalled. "Look, Charlie, I'm busy. Maybe later-"
"No," I insisted. "Now-right now. Both of you have been avoiding me. Why?"Frank, the fast talker, the ladies' man, the arranger, studied me for amoment and then set the tray down on the table. "Why? I'll tell you why. Becauseall of a sudden you're a big shot, a know-it-all, a brainl Now you'rea regular whiz kid, an egghead. Always with a book, always with all theanswers. Well, I'll tell you something. You think you're better than the restof us here? Okay, go someplace else."
"But what did I do to you?""What did he do? Hear that, Joe? I'll tell you what you did, Mister Gordon. Youcome pushing in here with your ideas and suggestions and make the rest ofus all look like a bunch of dopes. But I'll tell you something. To me you'restill a moron. Maybe I don't understand some of them big words or the namesof the books, but I'm as good as you are-better even.""Yeah." Joe nodded, turning to emphasize the point to Gimpy who had justcome up behind him.
"I'm not asking you to be my friends," I said, "or have anything to do withme. Just let me keep my job. Mr Donner says it's up to you."Gimpy glared at me and then shook his head in disgust. "You got a nerve," heshouted. "You can go to hell!" Then he turned and limped off heavily.And so it went. Most of them felt the way Joe and Frank and Gimpy did. Ithad been all right as long as they could laugh at me and appear clever at myexpense, but now they were feeling inferior to the moron. I began to see thatby my astonishing growth I had made them shrink and emphasized theirinadequacies. I had betrayed them, and they hated me for it.Fanny Birden was the only one who didn't think I should be forced to leave,and despite their pressure and threats, she had been the only one not to signthe petition.
"Which don't mean to say," she remarked, "that I don't think there'ssomething mighty strange about you, Charlie. The way you've changed! I don'tknow. You used to be a good, dependable man -- ordinary, not too brightmaybe, but honest-and who knows what you done to yourself to get so smartall of a sudden. Like everybody's been saying-it ain't right.""But what's wrong with a person wanting to be more intelligent, to acquireknowledge, and understand himself and the world?""If you'd read your Bible, Charlie, you'd know that it's not meant for manto know more than was given to him to know by the Lord in the first place. Thefruit of that tree was forbidden to man. Charlie, if you done anythingyou wasn't supposed to-you know, like with the devil or something-maybe itain't too late to get out of it. Maybe you could go back to being the goodsimple man you was before."
"There's no going back, Fanny. 'I haven't done anything wrong. I'm like aman born blind who has been given a chance to see light. That can't besinful. Soon there'll be millions like me all over the world. Science can doit, Fanny."
She stared down at the bride and groom on the wedding cake she wasdecorating and I could see her lips barely move as she whispered: "It wasevil when Adam and Eve ate from the tree of knowledge. It was evil when theysaw they was naked, and learned about lust and shame. And they was driven outof Paradise and the gates was closed to them. If not for that none of uswould have to grow old and be sick and die."There was nothing more to say, to her or to the rest of them. None of themwould look into my eyes. I can still feel the hostility. Before, they hadlaughed at me, despising me for my ignorance and dullness; now, they hated mefor my knowledge and understanding. Why? What in God's name did they want ofme?
This intelligence has driven a wedge between me and all the people I knewand loved, driven me out of the bakery. Now, I'm more alone than ever before. Iwonder what would happen if they put Algernon back in the big cage with someof the other mice. Would they turn against him?May 25 - So this is how a person can come to despise himself-knowing he's doingthe wrong thing and not being able to stop. Against my will I found myselfdrawn to Alice's apartment. She was surprised but she let me in. "You're soaked. Thewater is streaming down your face."
"It's raining. Good for the flowers.""Come on in. Let me get you a towel. You'll catch pneumonia.""You're the only one I can talk to," I said "Let me stay.""I've got a pot of fresh coffee on the stove. Go ahead and dry yourself andthen we can talk."
I looked around while she went to get the coffee. It was the first time Ihad ever been inside her apartment. I felt a sense of pleasure, but there wassomething disturbing about the room.
Everything was neat. The porcelain figurines were in a straight line on thewindow-ledge, all facing the same way. And the throw-pillows on the sofahadn't been thrown at all, but were regularly spaced on the clear plasticcovers that protected the upholstery. Two of the end tables had magazines,neatly stacked so that the titles were clearly visible. On one table: TheReporter, The Saturday Review, The New Yorker; on the other: Mademoiselle, HouseBeautiful, and Reader's Digest.
On the far wall, across from the sofa, hung an ornately framed reproductionof Picasso's "Mother and Child," and directly opposite, above the sofa, wasa painting of a dashing Renaissance courtier, masked, sword in hand,protecting a frightened, pink-cheeked maiden. Taken all together, it waswrong. As if Alice couldn't make up her mind who she was and which world shewanted to live in.
"You haven't been to the lab for a few days," she called from the kitchen."Professor Nemur is worried about you.""I couldn't face them," I said. "I know there's no reason for me to beashamed, but it's an empty feeling not going in to work every day-not seeingthe shop, the ovens, the people. It's too much. Last night and the nightbefore, I had nightmares of drowning."
She set the tray in the center of the coffee table-the napkins folded intotriangles, and the cookies laid out in a circular display pattern. "Youmustn't take it so hard, Charlie. It has nothing to do with you.""It doesn't help to tell myself that. Those people -- for all these years-were myfamily. It was like being thrown out of my own home.""That's just it," she said. "This has become a symbolic repetition ofexperiences you had as a child. Being rejected by your parents... beingsent away... "
"Oh, Christ! Never mind giving it a nice neat label. What matters is thatbefore I got involved in this experiment I had friends, people who cared forme. Now I'm afraid-""You've still got friends.""It's not the same.""Fear is a normal reaction.""It's more than that. I've been afraid before. Afraid of being strapped fornot giving in to Norma, afraid of passing Howells Street where the gang usedto tease me and push the around. And I was afraid of the schoolteacher, Mrs Libby,who tied my hands so I wouldn't fidget with things on my desk. But those thingswere real, something I was justified in being afraid of. This terror at being kickedout of the bakery is vague, a fear I don't understand.""Get hold of yourself.""You don't feel the panic.""But, Charlie, it's to be expected. You're a new swimmer forced off a divingraft and terrified of losing the solid wood under your feet. Mr Donner wasgood to you, and you were sheltered all these years. Being driven out of thebakery this way is an even greater shock than you expected.""Knowing it intellectually doesn't help. I can't sit alone in my room anymore. I wander into the streets at all hours of the day or night, not knowingwhat I'm looking for... walking until I'm lost... finding myselfoutside the bakery. Last night I walked all the way from Washington Square toCentral Park, and I slept in the park. What the hell am I searching for?"The more I talked, the more upset she became. "What can I do to helpyou, Charlie?"
"I don't know. I'm like an animal who's been locked out of his nice, safecage."
She sat beside me on the couch. "They're pushing you too fast. You'reconfused. You want to be an adult, but there's still a little boy insideyou. Alone and frightened." She put my head on her shoulder, trying to comfortme, and as she stroked my hair I knew that she needed me the way I needed her."Charlie," she whispered after a while, "whatever you want... don't beafraid of me.."
I wanted to tell her I was waiting for the panic.Once -- during a bakery delivery -- Charlie had nearly fainted when amiddle-aged woman, just out of the bath, amused herself by opening herbathrobe and exposing herself. Had he ever seen a woman without clotheson? Did he know how to make love? His terror-his whining-must have frightened herbecause she clutched her robe together and gave him a quarter to forget whathad happened. She was only testing him, she warned, to see if he was a goodboy.
He tried to be good, he told her, and not look at women, because his motherused to beat him whenever that happened in his pants...Now he had the clear picture of Charlie's mother, screaming at him, holdinga leather belt in her hand, and his father trying to hold her back."Enough, Rose! You'll kill him! Leave him alone!" His mother straining forwardto lash at him, just out of reach now so that the belt swishes past his shoulderas he writhes and twists away from it on the floor."Look at him!" Rose screams. "He can't learn to read and write, but he knowsenough to look at a girl that way. I'll beat that filth out of his mind.""He can't help it if he gets an erection. It's normal. He didn't doanything."
"He's got no business to think that way about girls. A friend of hissister's comes to the house and he starts thinking like that! I'll teach himso he never forgets. Do you hear? If you ever touch a girl, I'll put you awayin a cage, like an animal, for the rest of your life. Do you hear me?..."I still hear her. But perhaps I had been released. Maybe the fear and nauseawas no longer a sea to drown in. but only a pool of water reflecting the pastalongside the now. Was I free?If I could reach Alice in time-without thinking about it, before itoverwhelmed me-maybe the panic wouldn't happen. If only I could make my minda blank. I managed to choke out: "You... you do it! Hold me!" And before I knew whatshe was doing, she was kissing me, holding me closer than anyone had ever held mebefore. But at the moment I should have come closest of all, it started: thebuzzing, the chill, and the nausea. I turned away from her.
She tried to soothe me, to tell me it didn't matter, that there was noreason to blame myself. But ashamed, and no longer able to control myanguish, I began to sob. There in her arms I cried myself to sleep, and Idreamed of the courtier and the pink-cheeked maiden. But in my dream it wasthe maiden who held the sword.

%%%%%PROGRESS REPORT 12June 5 - Nemur is upset because I haven't turned in anyprogress reports in almost two weeks (and he's justifiedbecause the Welberg Foundation has begun paying me asalary out of the grant so that I won't have to look for ajob). The International Psychological Convention at Chicago is only a weekaway. He wants his preliminary report to be as full as possible, sinceAlgernon and I are the prime exhibits for his presentation.Our relationship is becoming increasingly strained. I resent Nemur'sconstant references to me as a laboratory specimen. He makes me feel thatbefore the experiment I was not really a human being.
I told Strauss that I was too involved in thinking, reading, and digginginto myself, trying to understand who and what I am, and that writing wassuch a slow process it made me impatient to get my ideas down. I followed hissuggestion that I learn to type, and now that I can type nearly seventy-fivewords a minute, it's easier to get it all down on paper.Strauss again brought up my need to speak and write simply and directly sothat people will understand me. He reminds me that language is sometimes abarrier instead of a pathway. Ironic to find myself on the other side of theintellectual fence.
I see Alice occasionally, but we don't discuss what happened Our relationshipremains platonic. But for three nights after I left the bakery there were thenightmares. Hard to believe it was two weeks ago.I am pursued down the empty streets at night by ghostly figures. Though Ialways run to the bakery, the door is locked, and the people inside neverturn to look at me. Through the window, the bride and groom on the weddingcake point at me and laugh-the air becomes charged with laughter until Ican't stand it-and the two cupids wave their flaming arrows. I scream. Ipound on the door, but there is no sound. I see Charlie staring back at mefrom inside. Is it only a reflection? Things clutch at my legs and drag meaway from the bakery down into the shadows of the alleyway, and just as theybegin to ooze all over me I wake up.
Other times the window of the bakery opens into the past and looking throughit I see other things and other people.It's astonishing how my power of recall is developing. I cannot control itcompletely yet, but sometimes when I'm busy reading or working on a problem, Iget a feeling of intense clarity.
I know it's some kind of subconscious warning signal, and now instead ofwaiting for the memory to come to me, I close my eyes and reach out forit. Eventually, I'll be able to bring this recall completely under control, toexplore not only the sum of my past experiences, but also all of the untappedfaculties of the mind.
Even now, as I think about it, I feel the sharp stillness. I see the bakerywindow... reach out and touch it... cold and vibrating, and then theglass becomes warm... hotter... fingers burning. The window reflectingmy image becomes bright, and as the glass turns into a mirror, I see littleCharlie Gordon-fourteen or fifteen-looking out at me through the window of hishouse, and it's doubly strange to realize how different he was... .He has been waiting for his sister to come from school, and when he sees herturn the corner onto Marks Street, he waves and calls her name and runs outonto the porch to meet her.
Norma waves a paper."I got an A in my history test. I knew all the answers. Mrs Baffin said itwas the best paper in the whole class."She is a pretty girl with light brown hair carefully braided and coed abouther head in a crown, and as she looks up at her big brother the smile turnsto a frown and she skips away, leaving him behind as she darts up the stepsinto the house. Smiling, he follows her.
His mother and father are in the kitchen, and Charlie, bursting with theexcitement of Norma's good news, blurts it out before she has a chance."She got an A! She got an A!"
"No!" shrieks Norma. "Not you. You don't tell. It's my mark, and I'm goingto tell.""Now wait a minute, young lady." Matt puts his newspaper down and addressesher sternly. "That's no way to talk to your brother.""He had no right to tell!"
"Never mind." Matt glares at her over his warning finger. "He meant no harmby it, and you musn't shout at him that way."She turns to her mother for support. "I got an A-the best mark in class. NowI can have a dog? You promised. You said if I got a good mark in my test. AndI got an A. A brown dog with white spots. And I'm going to call him Napoleonbecause that was the question I answered best on the test. Napoleon lost thebattle of Waterloo."
Rose nods. "Go out on the porch and play with Charlie. He's been waitingover an hour for you to come home from school.""I don't want to play with him.""Go out on the porch," says Matt.Norma looks at her father and then at Charlie. "I don't have to. Mother saidI don't have to play with him if I don't want to.""Now, young lady"-Matt rises out of his chair and comes toward her-"you justapologize to your brother."
"I don't have to," she screeches, rushing behind her mother's chair. "He'slike a baby. He can't play Monopoly or checkers or anything... he getseverything all mixed up. I won't play with him any more.""Then go to your room!""Can I have a dog now, Mama?"
Matt hits the table with his fist. "There'll be no dog in this house as longas you take this attitude, young lady.""I promised her a dog if she did well in school-""A brown one with white spots!" adds Norma.Matt points to Charlie standing near the wall. "Did you forget you told yourson he couldn't have one because we didn't have the room, and no one to takecare of it. Remember? When he asked for a dog? Are you going back on what yousaid to him?"
"But I can take care of my own dog," insists Norma. "I'll feed him, and washhim, and take him out..."Charlie, who has been standing near the table, playing with his large redbutton at the end of a string, suddenly speaks out."I'll help her take care of the dog! I'll help her feed it and brush it andI won't let the other dogs bite it!"But before either Matt or Rose can answer, Norma shrieks: "Nol It's going tobe my dog. Only my dog!"Matt nods. "You see?"
Rose sits beside her and strokes her braids to calm her. "But we have toshare things, dear. Charlie can help you take care of it.""No! Only mine!... I'm the one who got the A in history not him! He never getsgood marks like me. Why should he help with the dog? And then the dog will likehim more than me, and it'll be his dog instead of mine. No! If I can't have itfor myself I don't want it.""That settles it," says Matt picking up his newspaper and settling down inhis chair again. "No dog."
Suddenly, Norma jumps off the couch and grabs the history test she hadbrought home so eagerly just a few minutes earlier. She tears it and throwsthe pieces into Charlie's startled face. "I hate youl I hate you!""Norms, stop that at once!" Rose grabs her but she twists away."And I hate school! I hate it! I'll stop studying, and I'll be a dummy likehim. I'll forget everything I learned and then I'll be just like him." Sheruns out of the room, shrieking: "It's happening to me already. I'mforgetting everything... I'm forgetting... I don't remember anything Ilearned any morel"
Rose, terrified, runs after her. Matt sits there staring at the newspaper inhis lap. Charlie, frightened by the hysteria and the screaming, shrinks intoa chair whimpering softly. What has he done wrong? And feeling the wetness inhis trousers and the trickling down his leg' he sits there waiting for theslap he knows will come when his mother returns.
The scene fades, but from that time Norma spent all her free moments withher friends, or playing alone in her mom. She kept the door to her roomclosed, and I was forbidden to enter without her permission.I recall once overhearing Norma and one of her girl friends playing in herroom, and Norma shouting: "He is not my real brother! He's just a boy we tookin because we felt sorry for him. My mamma told me, and she said I can telleveryone now that he's not really my brother at all."I wish this memory were a photograph so that I couldtear it up and throw it back into her face. I want to callback across the years and tell her I never meant to stopher from getting her dog. She could have had it all to herself, and Iwouldn't have fed it, or brushed it, or playedwith it and I would never have made it like me morethan it liked her. I only wanted her to play games withme the way we used to. I never meant to do anything thatwould hurt her at all.
June 6 - My first real quarrel with Alice today. My fault. I wanted to seeher. Often, after a disturbing memory or dream, talking to her-just being withher-makes me feel better. But it was a mistake to go down to the Center topick her up.
I had not been back to the Center for Retarded Adults since the operation,and the thought of seeing the place was exciting. It's on Twenty-thirdStreet, east of Fifth Avenue, in an old schoolhouse that has been used by theBeekman University Clinic for the last five years as a center forexperimental education-special classes for the handicapped. The sign outsideon the doorway, framed by the old spiked gateway, is just a gleaming brassplate that says C. R. A. Beekman Extension.Her class ended at eight, but I wanted to see the mom where-not so longago-I had struggled over simple reading and writing and learned to countchange of a dollar.
I went inside, slipped up to the door, and, keeping out of sight, I lookedthrough the window. Alice was at her desk, and in a chairbeside her was a thin-faced woman I didn't recognize. She was frowning thatopen frown of unconcealed puzzlement, and I wondered what Alice was trying toexplain.
Near the blackboard was Mike Dorni in his wheelchair, and there in his usualfirst-row first-seat was Lester Braun, who, Alice said, was the smartest inthe group. Lester had learned easily what I had struggled over, but he camewhen he felt like it, or he stayed away to earn money waxing floors. I guessif he had cared at all-if it had been important to him as it was to me-theywould have used him for this experiment. There were new faces, too, people Ididn't know.Finally, I got up the nerve to go in."It's Charlie!" said Mike, whirling his wheelchair around.I waved to him.
Bernice, the pretty blonde with empty eyes, looked up and smiled dully."Where ya been, Charlie? That's a nice suit."The others who remembered me waved to me and I waved back. Suddenly, I couldsee by Alice's expression that she was annoyed."It's almost eight o'clock," she announced. "Time to put things away."Each person had an assigned task, the putting away of chalk, erasers,papers, books, pencils, note paper, paints, and demonstration material. Eachone knew his job and took pride in doing it well. They all started on theirtasks except Bernice. She was staring at me."Why ain't Charlie been coming to school?" asked Bernice. "What's thematter, Charlie? Are you coming back?"The others looked up at me. I looked to Alice, waiting for her to answer forme, and there was a long silence. What could I tell them that would not hurtthem?
"This is just a visit," I said.One of the girls started to giggle-Francine, whomAlice was always worried about. She had given birth tothree children by the time she was eighteen, before herparents arranged for a hysterectomy. She wasn't pretty - not nearly as attractiveas Bernice - but she had been an easy mark fordozens of men who bought her something pretty, or paid her way to the movies.She lived at a boarding house approved for outside work trainees by theWarren State Home, and was permitted out in the evenings to come to theCenter. Twice she hadn't shown up-picked up by men on the way to school -- andnow she was allowed out only with an escort.
"He talks like a big shot now," she giggled.
"All right," said Alice, breaking in sharply. "Class dismissed. I'll see youall tomorrow night at six."
When they were gone, I could see by the way she was slamming her own thingsinto her closet, that she was angry."I'm sorry," I said. "I was going to wait for you downstairs, and then I gotcurious about the old classroom. My alma mater. I just wanted to look throughthe window. And before I knew what I was doing I came in. What's botheringyou?""Nothing-nothing's bothering me."
"Come on. Your anger is all out of proportion to what's happened. Something's onyour mind."
She slammed down a book she was holding. "All right. You want to know? You'redifferent. You've changed. And I'm not talking about your IQ It's your attitudetoward people-you're not the same kind of human being-""Oh, come on now! Don't --""Don't interrupt me!" The real anger in her voice pushed me back. "I meanit. There was something in you before. I don't know... a warmth, anopenness, a kindness that made everyone like you and like to have you around. Now,with all your intelligence and knowledge, there are differences that-"I couldn't let myself listen. "What did you expect? Did you think I'd remaina docile pup, wagging my tail and licking the foot that kicks me? Sure, allthis has changed me and the way I think about myself. I no longer have totake the kind of crap that people have been handing me all my life.""People have not been bad to you."
"What do you know about it? Listen, the best of them have been smug andpatronizing - using me to make themselves superior andsecure in their own limitations. Anyone can feel intelligent beside a moron."After I said it, I knew she was going to take it the wrong way."You put me in that category too, I suppose.""Don't be absurd. You know damned well I-""Of course, in a sense, I guess you're right. Next to you I am ratherdull-witted. Nowadays every time we see each other, after I leave you I gohome with the miserable feeling that I'm slow and dense about everything. Ireview things I've said, and come up with all the bright and witty things Ishould have said, and I feel like kicking myself because I didn't mentionthem when we were together.""That's a common experience."
"I find myself wanting to impress you in a way I never thought about doingbefore, but being with you has undermined my self-confidence. I question mymotives now, about everything I do."
I tried to get her off the subject, but she kept coming back to it. "Look,I didn't come here to argue with you," I finally said. "Will you let me takeyou home? I need someone to talk to."
"So do I. But these days I can't talk to you. All I can do is listen andnod my head and pretend I understand all about cultural variants, andneo-Boulean mathematics, and post-symbolic logic, and I feel more and morestupid, and when you leave the apartment, I have to stare in the mirror andscream at myself: `No, you're not growing duller every day! You're not losingyour intelligencel You're not getting senile and dull-witted. It's Charlieexploding forward so quickly that it makes it appear as if you're slippingbackwards.' I say that to myself, Charlie, but whenever we meet and you tellme something and look at me in that impatient way, I know you're laughing."And when you explain things to me, and I can't remember them, you thinkit's because I'm not interested and don't want to take the trouble. But youdon't know how I torture myself when you're gone. You don't know the booksI've struggled over, the lectures I've sat in on at Beekman, and yet wheneverI talk about something, I see how impatient you are, as if it were allchildish. I wanted you to be intelligent. I wanted to help you and share withyou - and now you've shut me out of your life."
As I listened to what she was saying; the enormity of it dawned on me. I hadbeen so absorbed in myself and what was happening to me that I never thoughtabout what was happening to her.
She was crying silently as we left the school, and I found myself withoutwords. All during the ride on the bus I thought to myself how upside-down thesituation had become. She was terrified of me. The ice had broken between usand the gap was widening as the current of my mind carried me swiftly intothe open sea.
She was right in refusing to torture herself by being with me. We no longerhad anything in common. Simple conversation had become strained. And allthere was between us now was the embarrassed silence and unsatisfied longingin a darkened room."You're very serious," she said, breaking out of her own mood and looking upat me."About us."
"It shouldn't make you so serious. I don't want to upset you. You're goingthrough a great trial." She was trying to smile."But you did. Only I don't know what to do about it."On the way from the bus stop to her apartment, she said, "I'm not going tothe convention with you. I called Professor Nemur this morning and toldhim. There will be a lot for you to do there. Interesting people - theexcitement of the spotlight for a while. I don't want to be in the way-""Alice-"
"-and no matter what you say about it now, I know that's how I'm going tofeel, so if you don't mind, I'll hang on to my splintering ego-thank you.""But you're making more of this than it is. I'm sure if you'll just-""You know? You're sure?" She turned and glared at me on the front steps ofher apartment building. "Oh, how insufferable you've become. How do you knowwhat I feel? You take liberties with other people's minds. You can't tell howI feel or what I feel or why I feel."She started inside and then she looked back at me, her voice shaky: "I'll behere when you get back. I'm just upset, that's all, and I want both of us tohave a chance to think this out while we're a good distance apart."For the first time in many weeks she didn't ask me inside. I stared at theclosed door with the anger mounting inside me. I wanted to create a scene, tobang on the door, to break it down. I wanted my anger to consume thebuilding.
But as I walked away I felt a kind of simmering, then cooling, and finallya relief. I walked so fast I was drifting along the streets, and the feelingthat hit my cheek was a cool breeze out of the summer night. Suddenly free.I realize now that my feeling for Alice had been moving backward against thecurrent of my learning, from worship. to love, to fondness, to a feeling ofgratitude and responsibility. My confused feeling for her had been holding meback, and I had clung to her out of my fear of being forced out on my own,and cut adrift.
But with the freedom came a sadness. I wanted to be in love with her. Iwanted to overcome my emotional and sexual fears, to marry, have children,settle down.Now it's impossible. I am just as far away from Alice with an IQ of 185 asI was when I had an IQ of 70. And this time we both know it.June 8 - What drives me out of the apartment to prowlthrough the city? I wander through the streets alone-notthe relaxing stroll of a summer night, but the tense hurryto get-where? Down alleyways, looking into doorways,peering into half-shuttered windows, wanting someone totalk to and yet afraid to meet anyone. Up one street, anddown another, through the endless labyrinth, hurling myself against the neoncage of the city. Searching... for what?I met a woman in Central Park. She was sitting on a bench near the lake,with a coat clutched around her despite the heat. She smiled and motioned forme to sit beside her. We looked at the bright skyline on Central Park South,the honeycomb of lighted cells against the blackness, and I wished I couldabsorb them all.
Yes, I told her, I was from New York. No, I had never been to NewportNews, Virginia. That's where she was from, and where she had marriedthis sailor who was at sea now, and she hadn't seen him in two and a halfyears.
She twisted and knotted a handkerchief, using it from time to time to wipethe beaded sweat from her forehead. Even in the dim light reflected from thelake, I could see that she wore a great deal of make-up, but she lookedattractive with her straight dark hair loose to her shoulders-except thather face was puffy and swollen as if she had just gotten up from sleep. Shewanted to talk about herself, and I wanted to listen.
Her father had given her a good home, an education, everything a wealthyshipbuilder could give his only daughter-but not forgiveness. He would neverforgive her elopement with the sailor.
She took my hand as she spoke, and rested her head on my shoulder. "Thenight Gary and I were married," she whispered, "I was a terrified virgin. Andhe just went crazy. First, he had to slap me and beat me. And then he took mewith no love-making. That was the last time we were ever together. I neverlet him touch me again."
She could probably tell by the trembling of my hand that I was startled. Itwas too violent and intimate for me. Feeling my hand stir, she gripped ittighter as if she had to finish her story before she could let me go. It wasimportant to her, and I sat quietly as one sits before a bird that feeds fromyour palm.
"Not that I don't like men," she assured me with wide-eyed openness. "I'vebeen with other men. Not him, but lots of others. Most men are gentle andtender with a woman. They make love slowly, with caresses and kisses first."She looked at me meaningfully, and let her open palm brush back and forthagainst mine.
It was what I had heard about, read about, dreamed about. I didn't know hername, and she didn't ask mine. She just wanted me to take her someplace wherewe could be alone. I wondered what Alice would think.I caressed her awkwardly and kissed her still more hesitantly so that shelooked up at me. "What's the matter?" she whispered. "What are you thinking?""About you."
"Do you have a place we can go?"Each step forward was caution. At what point would the ground give way andplunge me into anxiety? Something kept me moving ahead to test my footing."If you don't have a place, the Mansion Hotel on Fifty-third doesn't cost toomuch. And they don't bother you about luggage if you pay in advance.""I have a room -"
She looked at me with new respect. "Well, that's fine."Still nothing. And that in itself was curious. How far could I go withoutbeing overwhelmed by symptoms of panic? When we were alone in the room? Whenshe undressed? When I saw her body? When we were lying together?Suddenly, it was important to know if I could be like other men, if I couldever ask a woman to share a life with me. Having intelligence and knowledgewasn't enough. I wanted this, too. The sense of release and looseness wasstrong now with the feeling that it was possible. The excitement that cameover me when I kissed her again communicated itself, and I was sure I couldbe normal with her. She was different from Alice. She was the kind of womanwho had been around.
Then her voice changed, uncertain."Before we go... Just one thing...".
She stood up and took a step toward me in the spray of lamplight, opening hercoat, and I could see the shape of her body as I had not imagined it all thetime we were sitting next to each other in the shadows."Only the fifth month," she said. "It doesn't make any difference. You don'tmind, do you?"
Standing there with her coat open, she was superimposed as a double exposureon the picture of the middle-aged woman just out of the bathtub, holding openher bathrobe for Charlie to see. And I waited, as a blasphemer waits forlightning. I looked away. It was the last thing I had expected, but the coatwrapped tightly around her on such a hot night should have warned me thatsomething was wrong.
"It's not my husband's," she assured me. "I wasn't lying to you about whatI said before. I haven't seen him for years. It was a salesman I met abouteight months ago. I was living with him. I'm not going to see him any more,but I'm going to keep the baby. We've just got to be careful-not rough oranything like that. But otherwise you don't have to worry."Her voice ran down when she saw my anger. "That's filthy!" I shouted. "Youought to be ashamed of yourself."
She drew away, wrapping her coat quickly around her to protect what laywithin.
As she made that protective gesture, I saw the second double image: mymother, heavy with my sister, in the days when she was holding me less,warming me less with her voice and touch, protecting me less against anyonewho dared to say I was subnormal.
I think I grabbed her shoulder-I'm not sure, but then she was screaming, andI was sharply back to reality with the sense of danger. I wanted to tell herI had meant no harm-I would never hurt her or anyone."Please, don't scream!"
But she was screaming, and I heard the running footsteps on the darkenedpath. This was something no one would understand. I ran into the darkness, tofind an exit from the park, zig-tagging across one path and down another. Ididn't know the park, and suddenly I crashed into something that threw mebackwards. A wire-mesh fence -- a dead end. Then I saw the swings and slidesand realized it was a children's playground locked up for the night. Ifollowed the fence, and kept going, half-running, stumbling over twistedroots. At the lake that curved around near the playground, I doubled back,found another path, went over the small footbridge and then around and underit. No exit.
"What is it? What happened, lady?""A maniac?""You all right?""Which way did he go?"I had circled back to where I had started from. I slipped behind the hugeoutcropping of a rock and a screen of bramble and dropped flat on my stomach."Get a cop. There's never a cop when you need one.""What happened?""A degenerate tried to rape her.""Hey, some guy down there is chasing him. There he goes!""Come on! Get the bastard before he gets outta the park!""Careful. He's got a knife and a gun..."It was obvious that the shouting had flushed out the night crawlers becausethe cry of "there he goes!" was echoed from behind me, and looking out frombehind the rock I could see a lone runner being chased down the lamplit path into thedarkness. Seconds later, another one passed in front of the rock anddisappeared into the shadows. I pictured myself being caught by this eagermob and beaten and torn by them. I deserved it. I almost wanted it.I stood up, brushed the leaves and dirt from my clothing and walked slowlydown the path in the direction from which I had come. I expected every secondto be grabbed from behind and pulled down into the dirt and darkness, butsoon I saw the bright lights of Fifty-ninth Street and Fifth Avenue, and Icame out of the park.
Thinking about it now, in the security of my room, I am shaken with therawness that touched me. Remembering how my mother looked before she gavebirth to my sister is frightening. But even more frightening is the feelingthat I wanted them to catch me and beat me. Why did I want to be punished?Shadows out of the past clutch at my legs and drag me down. I open my mouthto scream, but I am voiceless. My hands are trembling, I feel cold, and thereis a distant humming in my ears.

%%%%%PROGRESS REPORT 13June 10 - We're on a Strato-jet about to take off for Chicago. I owe thisprogress report to Burt who had the bright idea that I could dictate this ona transistor tape recorder and have a public stenographer in Chicago type itup. Nemur likes the idea. In fact, he wants me to use the recorder up to thelast minute. He feels it will add to the report if they play the most recenttape at the end of the session.
So here I am, sitting off by myself in our private section of a jet on theway to Chicago, trying to get used to thinking aloud, and to the sound of myown voice. I suppose the typist can get rid of all the uhm's, er's and ah's,and make it all seem natural on paper (I can't help the paralysis that comesover me when I think hundreds of people are going to listen to the words I'msaying now).
My mind is a blank. At this point my feelings are more important thananything else.The idea of going up in the air terrifies me.As far as I can tell, in the days before the operation, I never reallyunderstood what planes were. I never connected the movies and TV close-ups ofplanes with the things that I saw zooming overhead Now that we're about totake off I can think only of what might happen if we crash. A cold feeling,and the thought that I don't want to die. Brings to mind those discussionsabout God.
I've thought about death often in recent weeks, but not really about God. Mymother took me to church occasionally -- but I don't recall ever connectingthat up with the thought of God. She mentioned Him quite often, and I had topray to Him at night, but I never thought much about it. I remember Him as adistant uncle with a long beard on a throne (like Santa Claus in thedepartment store on his big chair, who picks you up on his knee and asks youif you've been good, and what would you like him to give you?). She wasafraid of Him, but asked favors anyway. My father never mentioned Him-it wasas if God was one of Rose's relatives he'd rather not get involved with."We're ready to take off, sir. May I help you fasten your seat belt?""Do I have to? I don't like to be strapped down."
"Until we're airborne.""I'd rather not, unless it's necessary. I've got this fear of being strappedin. It'll probably make me sick.""It's regulations, sir. Here, let me help you.""No! I'll do it myself.""No... that one goes through here.""Wait, uh....Okay."Ridiculous. There's nothing to be afraid of. Seat belt isn't tootight-doesn't hurt. Why should putting on the damned seat belt be soterrifying? That, and the vibrations of the plane taking off. Anxiety allout of proportion to the situation... so it must be something... what?... flyingup into and through dark clouds... fasten your seat belts... strappeddown... straining forward... odor of sweaty leather... vibrations anda roaring sound in my ears.
Through the window-in the clouds-I see Charlie. Age is difficult to tell,about five years old. Before Norma..."Are you two ready yet?" His father comes to the doorway, heavy, especiallyin the sagging fleshiness of his face and neck. He has a tired look. "I said,are you ready?"
"Just a minute," answers Rose. "I'm getting my hat on. See if his shirt isbuttoned, and tie his shoelaces.""Come on, let's get this thing over with.""Where?" asks Charlie. "Where... Charlie... go?"His father looks at him and frowns. Matt Gordon never knows how to react tohis son's questions.
Rose appears in the doorway of her bedroom, adjusting the half-veil of herhat. She is a birdlike woman, and her arms-up to her head, elbows out-looklike wings. "We're going to the doctor who is going to help you get smart."The veil makes it look as if she were peering down at him through a wirescreen. He is always frightened when they dress up to go out this way,because he knows he will have to meet other people and his mother will becomeupset and angry.
He wants to run, but there is no place for him to go."Why do you have to tell him that?" said Matt."Because it's the truth. Dr Guarino can help him."Matt paces the floor like a man who has given up hope but will make one lastattempt to reason. "How do you know? What do you know about this man? Ifthere was anything that could be done, the doctors would have told us longago."
"Don't say that," she screeches. "Don't tell me there's nothing they cando." She grabs Charlie and presses his head against her bosom. "He's going tobe normal, whatever we have to do, whatever it costs.""It's not something money can buy."
"It's Charlie I'm talking about. Your son... your only child." She rockshim from side to side, near hysteria now. "I won't listen to that talk. Theydon't know, so they say nothing can be done. Dr Guarino explained it all tome. They won't sponsor his invention, he says, because it will prove they'rewrong. Like it was with those other scientists, Pasteur and Jennings, and therest of them. He told me all about your fine medical doctors afraid ofprogress."
Talking back to Matt this way, she becomes relaxed and sure of herselfagain. When she lets go of Charlie, he goes to the corner and stands againstthe wall frightened and shivering."Look," she says, "you got him upset again.""Me?""You always start these things in front of him""Oh, Christ! Come on, let's get this damned thing over with."All the way to Dr Guarino's office they avoid speaking to each other. Silenceon the bus, and silence walking three blocks from the bus to thedowntown office building. After about fifteen minutes, Dr Guarino comes outto the waiting room to greet them. He is fat and balding, and he looks as ifwould pop through his white lab jacket. Charlie is fascinated by the thickwhite eyebrows and white moustache that twitch from time to time. Sometimesthe moustache twitches first, followed by the raising of both eyebrows, butsometimes the brows go up first and the moustache twitch follows.The large white room into which Guarino ushers them smells recently painted,and it is almost bare -- two desks on one side of the room, and on the other,a huge machine with rows of dials and four long arms like dentist's drills. Nearbyis a black leather examination table with thick, webbed, restraining straps."Well, well, well," says Guarino, raising his eyebrows, "so this isCharlie." He grips the boy's shoulders firmly. "We're going to be friends.""Can you really do anything for him, Dr Guarino?" says Matt. "Have you evertreated this kind of thing before? We don't have much money."
The eyebrows come down like shutters as Guarino frowns. "Mr Gordon, have Isaid anything yet about what I could do? Don't I have to examine himfirst? Maybe something can be done, maybe not. First there will have to bephysical and mental tests to determine the causes of the pathology. There willbe enough time later to talk of prognosis. Actually, I'm very busy thesedays. I only agreed to look into this case because I'm doing a special studyof this type of neural retardation. Of course, if you have qualms, then perhaps... "His voice trails off sadly, and he turns away, but Rose Gordon jabs at Mattwith her elbow. "My husband doesn't mean that at all, Dr Guarino. He talkstoo much." She glares at Matt again to warn him to apologize.
Matt sighs. "If there is any way you can help Charlie, we'll do anything youask. Things are slow these days. I sell barbershop supplies, but whatever Ihave I'll be glad to-"
"Just one thing I must insist on," says Guarino, pursing his lips as ifmaking a decision. "Once we start, the treatment must continue all the way. Incases of this type, the results often come suddenly after long monthswithout any sign of improvement. Not that I am promising you success, mindyou. Nothing is guaranteed. But you must give the treatment a chance,otherwise you're better off not starting at all."
He frowns at them to let his warning sink in, and his brows are white shadesfrom under which his bright blue eyes stare. "Now, if you'll just stepoutside and let me examine the boy."
Matt hesitates to leave Charlie alone with him, but Guarino nods. "This isthe best way," he says, ushering them both outside to the waiting room. "Theresults are always more significant if the patient and I are alone when thepsychosubstantiation tests are performed. External distractions have adeleterious effect on the ramified scores."
Rose smiles at her husband triumphantly, and Matt follows her meeklyoutside.Alone with Charlie, Dr Guarino pats him on the head. He has a kindly smile."Okay, kid. On the table."When Charlie doesn't respond, he lifts him gently onto the leather-paddedtable and straps him down securely with heavy webbed straps. The table smellsof deeply ingrained sweat, and leather.
"Maaaa!""She's outside. Don't worry, Charlie. This won't hurt a bit.""Want Ma!" Charlie is confused at being restrained this way. He has no senseof what is being done to him, but there have been other doctors who were notso gentle after his parents left the room.
Guarino tries to calm him. "Take it easy, kid. Nothing to be scared of. Yousee this big machine here? Know what I'm going to do with it?"Charlie cringes, and then he recalls his mother's words. "Make me smart.""That's right. At least you know what you're here for. Now, just close youreyes and relax while I turn on these switches. It'll make a loud noise, likean airplane, but it won't hurt you. And we'll see if we can make you a littlebit smarter than you are now."
Guarino snaps on the switch that sets the huge machine humming, red and bluelights blinking on and off. Charlie is terrified. He cringes and shivers,straining against the straps that hold him fast to the table.He starts to scream, but Guarino quickly pushes a wad of cloth into hismouth. "Now, now, Charlie. None of that. You be a good little boy. I told youit won't hurt."
He tries to scream again, but all that comes out is a muffled choking thatmakes him want to throw up. He feels the wetness and the stickiness aroundhis legs, and the odor tells him that his mother will punish him with thespanking and the corner for making in his pants. He could not controlit. Whenever he feels trapped and panic sets in, he loses control and dirtieshimself. Choking... sick... nausea... and everything goes black...There is no way of knowing how much time passes, but when Charlie opens hiseyes, the cloth is out of his mouth, and the straps have been removed. Dr.Guarinopretends he does not smell the odor.
"Now that didn't hurt you a bit, did it?""N-no.""Well, then what are you trembling like that for? All I did was use thatmachine to make you smarter. How does it feel to be smarter now than you werebefore?"Forgetting his terror, Charlie stares wide-eyed at the machine. "Did I getsmart?""Of course you did. Uh, stand back over there. How does it feel?""Feels wet. I made.""Yes, well-uh-you won't do that next time, will you? You won't be scared anymore, now that you know it doesn't hurt. Now I want you to tell your mom howsmart you feel, and she'll bring you here twice a week for short-waveencephalo-reconditioning, and you'll get smarter, and smarter, and smarter."Charlie smiles. "I can walk backwards.""You can? Let's see," says Guarino closing his folder in mock excitement."Let me see."
Slowly, and with great effort, Charlie takes several steps backward,stumbling against the examination table as he goes. Guarino smiles and nods."Now that's what I call something. Oh, you wait. You're going to be thesmartest boy on your block before we're through with you."Charlie ffushes with pleasure at this praise and attention. It is not oftenthat people smile at him and tell him he has done something well. Even theterror of the machine, and of being strapped down to the table, begins tofade.
"On the whole block?" The thought fills him as if he cannot take enough airinto his lungs no matter how he tries. "Even smarter than Hymie?"Guarino smiles again and nods. "Smarter than Hymie."Charlie looks at the machine with new wonder and respect. The machine willmake him smarter than Hymie who lives two doors away and knows how to readand write and is in the Boy Scouts.
"Is that your machine?""Not yet. It belongs to the bank. But soon it'll be mine, and then I'll beable to make lots of boys like you smart." He pats Charlie's head and says,"You're a lot nicer than some of the normal kids whose mothers bring themhere hoping I can make geniuses out of them by raising their LQ. s."Do they be jean-asses if you raise their eyes?" He put his hands to hisface to see if the machine had done anything to raise his eyes. "You gonnamake me a jean-ass?"
Guarino's laugh is friendly as he squeezes Charlie's shoulder. "No, Charlie. Nothingfor you to worry about. Only nasty little donkeys become jean-asses. You'll stay justthe way you are-a nice kid." And then, thinking better of it he adds: "Of course, alittle smarter than you are now."
He unlocks the door and leads Charlie out to his parents. "Here he is,folks. None the worse for the experience. A good boy. I think we're going tobe good friends, eh, Charlie?"
Charlie nods. He wants Dr Guarino to like him, but he is terrified when hesees the expression on his mother's face. "Charliel What did you do?""Just an accident, Mrs Gordon. He was frightened the first time. But don'tblame him or punish him. I wouldn't want him to connect punishment withcoming here."
But Rose Gordon is sick with embarrassment. "It's disgusting. I don't knowwhat to do, Dr Guarino. Even at home he forgets-and sometimes when we havepeople in the house. I'm so ashamed when he does that."The look of disgust on his mother's face sets him trembling. For a shortwhile he had forgotten how bad he is, how he makes his parents suffer. Hedoesn't know how, but it frightens him when she says he makes her suffer, andwhen she cries and screams at him, he turns his face to the wall and moanssoftly to himself.
"Now don't upset him, Mrs Gordon, and don't worry. Bring him to me onTuesday and Thursday each week at the same time.""But will this really do any good?" asks Matt. "Ten dollars is a lot of-""Matt!" she clutches at his sleeve. "Is that anything to talk about at atime like this? Your own flesh and blood, and maybe Dr Guarino can make himlike other children, with the Lord's help, and you talk about money!"Matt Gordon starts to defend himself, but then, thinking better of it, hepulls out his wallet.
"Please... " sighs Guarino, as if embarrassed at the sight of money. "Myassistant at the front desk will take care of all the financial arrangements. Thank you."He half bows to Rose, shakes Matt's hand and pats Charlie on the back."Nice boy. Very nice."
Then, smiling again, he disappears behind the door to the inner office. Theyargue all the way home, Matt complaining that barber supply sales have fallenoff, and that their savings are dwindling, Rose screeching back that making Charlienormal is more important than anything else.Frightened by their quarreling, Charlie whimpers. The sound of anger intheir voices is painful to him. As soon as they enter the apartment, he pullsaway and runs to the corner of the kitchen, behind the door and stands withhis forehead pressed against the tile wall, trembling and moaning.They pay no attention to him. They have forgotten that he has to be cleanedand changed.
"I'm not hysterical. I'm just sick of you complaining every time I try to dosomething for your son. You don't care. You just don't care.""That's not true! But I realize there's nothing we can do. When you've gota child like him it's a cross, and you bear it, and love it. Well, I can bearhim, but I can't stand your foolish ways. You've spent almost all our savingson quacks and phonies-money I could have used to set me up in a nice businessof my own. Yes. Don't look at me that way. For all the money you've throwndown the sewer to do something that can't be done, I could have had abarbershop of my own instead of eating my heart out selling for ten hours aday. My own place with people working for me!""Stop shouting. Look at him, he's frightened."
"The hell with you. Now I know who's the dope around here. Me! For puttingup with you." He storms out, slamming the door behind him."Sorry to interrupt you, sir, but we're going to be landing in a fewminutes. You'll have to fasten your seat belt again... Oh, you have it on,sir. You've had it on all the way from New York. Close to two hours ..""I forgot all about it. I'll just leave it on until we land. It doesn't seemto bother me any more."
Now I can see where I got the unusual motivation for becoming smart that soamazed everyone at first. It was something Rose Gordon lived with day and night. Herfear, her guilt, her shame that Charlie was a moron. Her dream that something couldbe done. The urgent question always: whose fault was it, hers or Matt's? Only afterNorma proved to her that she was capable of having normal children, and that I wasa freak, did she stop trying to make me over. But I guess I never stoppedwanting to be the smart boy she wanted me to be, so that she would love me.A funny thing about Guarino. I should resent him for what he did to me, andfor taking advantage of Rose and Matt, but somehow I can't. After that firstday, he was always pleasant to me. There was always the pat on the shoulder,the smile, the encouraging word that came my way so rarely.He treated me-even then-as a human being.
It may sound like ingratitude, but that is one of the things that I resenthere-the attitude that I am a guinea pig. Nemur's constant references tohaving made me what I am, or that someday there will be others like me whowill become real human beings.
How can I make him understand that he did not create me?He makes the same mistake as the others when they look at a feeble-mindedperson and laugh because they don't understand there are human feelingsinvolved. He doesn't realize that I was a person before I came here.I am learning to control my resentment, not to be so impatient, to wait forthings. I guess I'm growing up. Each day I learn more and more about myself,and the memories that began as ripples now wash over me in high-breakingwaves... .
June 11 - The confusion began from the moment we arrived at the Chalmers Hotelin Chicago and discovered that by error our rooms would not be vacant untilthe next night and until then we would have to stay at the nearbyIndependence Hotel. Nemur was furious. He took it as a personal affront andquarrelled with everyone in the line of hotel command from the bellhop to themanager. We waited in the lobby as each hotel official went off in search ofhis superior to see what could be done.
In the midst of all the confusion-luggage drifting in and piling up all aroundthe lobby, bellboys hustling back and forth with their little baggage carts, memberswho hadn't seen each other in a year, recognizing and greeting each other - westood there feeling increasingly embarrassed as Nemur tried to collar officialsconnected with the International Psychological Association.Finally, when it became apparent that nothing could be done about it, heaccepted the fact that we would have to spend our first night in Chicago atthe Independence.
As it turned out, most of the younger psychologists were staying at theIndependence, and that was where the big first-night parties were. Here,people had heard about the experiment, and most of them knew who I was.Wherever we went, someone came up and asked my opinions on everything fromthe effects of the new tax to the latest archaeological discoveries inFinland. It was challenging, and my storehouse of general knowledge made iteasy for me to talk about almost anything. But after a while I could see thatNemur was annoyed at all the attention I was getting.
When an attractive young clinician from Falmouth College asked me if I couldexplain some of the causes of my own retardation, I told her that ProfessorNemur was the man to answer that.
It was the chance he had been waiting for to show his authority, and for thefirst time since we'd known each other he put his hand on my shoulder. "Wedon't know exactly what causes the type of phenylketonuria that Charlie wassuffering from as a child-some unusual biochemical or genetic situation,possibly ionizing radiation or natural radiation or even a virus attack onthe fetus-whatever it was resulted in a defective gene which produces a,shall we say, `maverick enzyme' that creates defective biochemical reactions. And,of course, newly produced amino acids compete with the normal enzymescausing brain damage."
The girl frowned. She had not expected a lecture, but Nemur had seized thefloor and he went on in the same vein. "I call it competitive inhibition ofenzymes. Let me give you an example of how it works. Think of the enzymeproduced by the defective gene as a wrong key which fits into the chemicallock of the central nervous system-but won't turn. Because it's there, thetrue key - the right enzyme - can't even enter the lock. It's blocked. Result?Irreversible destruction of proteins in the brain tissue."
"But if it is irreversible," intruded one of the other psychologists who hadjoined the little audience, "how is- it possible that Mr Gordon here is nolonger retarded?"
"Ah!" crowed Nemur, "I said the destruction to the tissue was irreversible,not the process itself. Many researchers have been able to reverse theprocess through injections of chemicals which combine with the defectiveenzymes, changing the molecular shape of the interfering key, as it were. Thisis central to our own technique as well. But first, we remove the damagedportions of the brain and permit the implanted brain tissue which hasbeen chemically revitalized to produce brain proteins at a supernormal rate-""Just a minute, Professor Nemur," I said, interrupting him at the height ofhis peroration. "What about Rahaja mati's work in that field?"
He looked at me blankly. "Who?""Rahajamati. His article attacks Tanida's theory of enzyme fusion-theconcept of changing the chemical structure of the enzyme blocking the step inthe metabolic pathway."He frowned. "Where was that article translated?""It hasn't been translated yet. I read it in the Hindu journal ofPsychopathology just a few days ago."He looked at his audience and tried to shrug it off. "Well, I don't think wehave anything to worry about. Our results speak for themselves""But Tamda himself first propounded the theory of blocking the maverickenzyme through combination, and now he points out that""Oh, come now, Charlie. Just because a man is the first to come forth witha theory doesn't make him the final word on its experimental development. Ithink everyone here will agree that the research done in the United Statesand Britain far outshines the work done in India and Japan. We still have thebest laboratories and the best equipment in the world""But that doesn't answer Rahajamati's point that -- -?'"This is not the time or place to go into that. I'm certain all of thesepoints will be adequately dealt with in tomorrow's session." He turned to talkto someone about an old college friend, cutting me off completely, and I stoodthere dumbfounded.
I managed to get Strauss off to one side, and I started questioning him."All right, now. You've been telling me I'm too sensitive to him. What did Isay that upset him that way?""You're making him feel inferior and he can't take it.""I'm serious, for God's sake. Tell me the truth.""Charlie, you've got to stop thinking that everyone is laughing at you. Nemurcouldn't discuss those articles because he hasn't read them. He can't readthose Languages. "
"Not read Hindi and Japanese? Oh, come on now.""Charlie, not everyone has your gift for languages.""But then how can he refute Rahajamati's attack on this method, and Tanida'schallenge to the validity of this kind of control? He must know about those-""No... ," said Strauss thoughtfully. "Those papers must be recent. Therehasn't been time to get translations made.""You mean you haven't read them either?"
He shrugged. "I'm an even worse linguist than he is. But I'm certain beforethe final reports are turned in, all the journals will be combed foradditional data."I didn't know what to say. To hear him admit that both of them were ignorantof whole areas in their own fields was terrifying. "What languages do youknow?" I asked him.
"French, German, Spanish, Italian, and enough Swedish to get along.""No Russian, Chinese, Portuguese?"He reminded me that as a practicing psychiatrist and Neurosurgeon he hadvery little time for languages. And the only ancient languages that he couldread were Latin and Greek. Nothing of the ancient Oriental tongues.I could see he wanted to end the discussion at that point, but somehow Icouldn't let go. I had to find out just how much he knew.I found out.
Physics: nothing beyond the quantum theory of fields. Geology: nothing aboutgeomorphology or stratigraphy or even petrology. Nothing about the micro- ormacroeconomic theory. Little in mathematics beyond the elementary level ofcalculus of variations, and nothing at all about Banach algebra or Riemannianmanifolds. It was the first inkling of the revelations that were in storefor me this weekend.
I couldn't stay at the party. I slipped away to walk and think thisout. Frauds - both of them. They had pretended to be geniuses. But they werejust ordinary men working blindly, pretending to be able to bring light intothe darkness. Why is it that everyone lies? No one I know is what he appearsto be. As I turned the corner I caught a glimpse of Burt coming after me."What's the matter?" I said as he caught up to me. "Are you following me?"He shrugged and laughed uncomfortably. "Exhibit A, star of the show. Can'thave you run down by one of these motorized Chicago cowboys or mugged androlled on State Street."
"I don't like being kept in custody."He avoided my gaze as he walked beside me, his hands deep in his pockets."Take it easy, Charlie. The old man is on edge. This convention means a lotto him. His reputation is at stake."
"I didn't know you were so close to him," I taunted, recalling all the timesBurt had complained about the professor's narrowness and pushing."I'm not close to him." He looked at me defiantly. "But he's put his wholelife into this. He's no Freud or Jung or Pavlov or Watson, but he's doingsomething important and I respect his dedication-maybe even morecause he's just an ordinary man trying to do a great man's work, while thegreat men are all busy making bombs."
"I'd like to hear you call him ordinary to his face.""It doesn't matter what he thinks of himself. Sure he's egotistic, so what?It takes that kind of ego to make a man attempt a thing like this. I've seenenough of men like him to know that mixed in with that pompousness andself-assertion is a goddamned good measure of uncertainty and fear.""And phoniness and shallowness," I added. "I see them now as they reallyare, phonies. I suspected it of Nemur. He always seemed frightened ofsomething. But Strauss surprised me."
Burt paused and let out a long stream of breath. We turned into aluncheonette for coffee, and I didn't see his face, but the sound revealedhis exasperation.
"You think I'm wrong?""Just that you've come a long way kind of fast," he said. "You've got asuperb mind now, intelligence that can't really be calculated, more knowledgeabsorbed by now than most people pick up in a long lifetime. But you'relopsided. You know things. You see things. But you haven't developedunderstanding, or-I have to use the word-tolerance. You call them phonies,but when did either of them ever claim to be perfect, or superhuman? They'reordinary people. You're the genius."
He broke off awkwardly, suddenly aware that he was preaching at me."Go ahead.""Ever meet Nemur's wife?""No.""If you want to understand why he's under tension all the time, even whenthings are going well at the lab and in his lectures, you've got to knowBertha Nemur. Did you know she's got him his professorship? Did you know sheused her father's influence to get him the Welberg Foundation grant? Well,now she's pushed him into this premature presentation at the convention. Untilyou've had a woman like her riding you, don't think you can understandthe man who has."I didn't say anything, and I could see he wanted to get back to the hotel. Allthe way back we were silent.
Am I a genius? I don't think so. Not yet anyway. As Burt would put it,mocking the euphemisms of educational jargon, I'm exceptional-a democraticterm used to avoid the damning labels of gifted and deprived (which used tomean bright and retarded) and as soon as exceptional begins to mean anythingto anyone they'll change it. The idea seems to be: use an expression only aslong as it doesn't mean anything to anybody. Exceptional refers to both endsof the spectrum, so all my life I've been exceptional.Strange about learning; the farther I go the more I see that I never kneweven existed. A short while ago I foolishly thought I could learneverything -- all the knowledge in the world. Now I hope only to be able toknow of its existence, and to understand one grain of it.Is there time?
Burt is annoyed with me. He finds me impatient and the others must feel thesame. But they hold me back and try to keep me in my place. What is my place?Who and what am I now? Am I the sum of my life or only of the past months?Oh, how impatient they get when I try to discuss it with them. They don'tlike to admit that they don't know. It's paradoxical that an ordinary manlike Nemur presumes, to devote himself to making other people geniuses. Hewould like to be thought of as the discoverer of new laws of learning-theEinstein of psychology. And he has the teacher's fear of being surpassed bythe student, the master's dread of having the disciple discredit hiswork. (Not that I am in any real sense Nemur's student or disciple asBurt is.)
I guess Nemur's fear of being revealed as a man walking on stilts amonggiants is understandable. Failure at this point would destroy him. He is tooold to start all over again.As shocking as it is to discover the truth about men I had respected andlooked up to, I guess Burt is right. I must not be too impatient with them. Theirideas and brilliant work made the experiment possible. I've got toguard against the natural tendency to look down on them now that I havesurpassed them.
I've got to realize that when they continually admonish me to speak andwrite simply so that people who read these reports will be able to understandme, they are talking about themselves as well. But still it's frightening torealize that my fate is in the hands of men who are not the giants I oncethought them to be, men who don't know all the answers.I'm dictating this under great emotional strain. I've walked out on the wholething. I'm on a plane headed back to New York alone, and I have no idea whatI'm going to do when I get there.
At first, I admit, I was in awe at the picture of an international convention ofscientists and scholars, gathered for an exchange of ideas. Here, I thought, waswhere it all really happened. Here it would be different from the sterile collegediscussions, because these were the men on the highest levels of psychologicalresearch and education, the scientists who wrote the books and delivered thelectures, the authorities people quoted. If Nemur and Strauss were ordinary menworking beyond their abilities, I felt sure it would be different with the others.When it was time for the meeting, Nemur steered us through the giganticlobby with its heavy baroque furnishings and huge curving marble staircases,and we moved through the thickening knots of handshakers, nodders, andsmilers. Two other professors from Beekman who had arrived in Chicago justthis morning joined us. Professors White and Clinger walked a little to theright and a step or two behind Nemur and Strauss, while Burt and I brought upthe rear.
Standees parted to make a path for us into the Grand Ballroom, and Nemurwaved to the reporters and photographers who had come to hear at first handabout the startling things that had been done with a retardate adult in justa little over three months.
Nemur had obviously sent out advance publicity releases.Some of the psychological papers delivered at the meeting were impressive. Agroup from Alaska showed how stimulation of various portions of the braincaused a significant development in learning ability, and a group from NewZealand had mapped out those portions of the brain that controlled perceptionand retention of stimuli.
But there were other kinds of papers too - P.T. Zellerman's study on thedifference in the length of time it took white rats to learn a maze when thecorners were curved rather than angular, or Worfel's paper on the effect ofintelligence level on the reaction-time of rhesus monkeys. Papers like thesemade me angry. Money, time, and energy squandered on the detailed analysis ofthe trivial. Burt was right when he praised Nemur and Strauss for devotingthemselves to something important and uncertain rather than to somethinginsignificant and safe.
If only Nemur would look at me as a human being.After the chairman announced the presentation from Beekman University, we tookour seats on the platform behind the long table -- Algernon in his cage betweenBurt and me. We were the main attraction of the evening, and when we weresettled, the chairman began his introduction. I half expected to bear him boomout: Laideezzz and gentulmennnnnn. Step right this way and see the side show! Anact never before seen in the scientific world! A mouse and a moron turned intogeniuses before your very eyes!
I admit I had come here with a chip on my shoulder.All he said was: "The next presentation really needs no introduction. Wehave all heard about the startling work being done at Beekman University,sponsored by the Welberg Foundation grants, under the direction of thechairman of the psychology department, Professor Nemur, in co-operation withDr Strauss of the Beekman Neuropsychiatric Center. Needless to say, this isa report we have all been looking forward to with great interest. I turn themeeting over to Professor Nemur and Dr Strauss."Nemur nodded graciously at the chairman's introductory praise and winked atStrauss in the triumph of the moment.
The first speaker from Beekman was Professor Clinger.I was becoming irritated, and I could see that Algernon, upset by the smoke,the buzzing, the unaccustomed surroundings, was moving around in his cagenervously. I had the strangest compulsion to open his cage and let him out. Itwas an absurd thought-more of an itch than a thought-and I tried to ignoreit. But as I listened to Professor Clinger's stereotyped paper on "Theeffects of lefthanded goal boxes in a T-maze versus right-handed goal boxesin a T-maze," I found myself toying with the release-lock mechanism ofAlgernon's cage.
In a short while (before Strauss and Nemur would unveil their crowningachievement) Burt would read a paper describing the procedures and results ofadministering intelligence and learning tests he had devised for Algernon. Thiswould be followed by a demonstration as Algernon was put through hispaces of solving a problem in order to get his meal (something I have neverstopped resenting!).
Not that I had anything against Burt. He had always been straightforward withme - more so than most of the others - but when he described the white mousewho had been given intelligence, he was as pompous and artificialas the others. As if he were trying on the mantle of histeachers. I restrained myself at that point more out offriendship for Burt than anything else. Letting Algernonout of his cage would throw the meeting into chaos, andafter all this was Burt's debut into the rat race of academic preferment.I had my finger on the cage door release, and as Algernon watched themovement of my hand with his pinkcandy eyes, I'm certain he knew what I hadin mind. At that moment Burt took the cage for his demonstration. Heexplained the complexity of the shifting lock, and the problem-solvingrequired each time the lock was to be opened. (Thin plastic bolts fell intoplace in varying patterns and had to be controlled by the mouse, whodepressed a series of levers in the same order.) As Algernon's intelligenceincreased, his problem-solving speed increased-that much was obvious. Butthen Burt revealed one thing I had not known.
At the peak of his intelligence, Algernon's performance had become variable. Therewere times, according to Burt's report, when Algernon refused to workat all, even when apparently hungry-and other times when he would solve theproblem but, instead of taking his food reward, would hurl himself againstthe walls of his cage.
When someone from the audience asked Burt if he was suggesting that thiserratic behavior was directly caused by increased intelligence, Burt duckedthe question. "As far as I am concerned," he said, "there's not enoughevidence to warrant that conclusion. There are other possibilities. It ispossible that both the increased intelligence and the erratic behavior atthis level were created by the original surgery, instead of one being afunction of the other. It's also possible that this erratic behavior isunique to Algernon. We didn't find it in any of the other mice, but then noneof the others achieved as high a level of intelligence nor maintained it foras long as Algernon has."
I realized immediately that this information had been withheld from me. Isuspected the reason, and I was annnoyed, but that was nothing to theanger I felt when they brought out the films.I had never known that my early performances andtests in the laboratory were filmed. There I was, at thetable beside Burt, confused and open-mouthed as I triedto run the maze with the electric stylus. Each time I received a shock, myexpression changed to an absurd wide-eyed stare, and then that foolish smileagain. Each time it happened the audience roared. Race after race, it wasrepeated and each time, they found it funnier than before.I told myself they were not gawking curiosity seekers, but scientists herein search of knowledge. They couldn't help finding these pictures funny-butstill, as Burt caught the spirit and made amusing comments on the films, Iwas overcome with a sense of mischief. It would be even funnier to seeAlgernon escape from his cage, and to see all these people scattering andcrawling around on their hands and knees trying to retrieve a small, white,scurrying genius.
But I controlled myself, and by the time Strauss took the podium the impulsehad passed.Strauss dealt largely with the theory and techniques of neurosurgery,describing in detail how pioneer studies on the mapping of hormone controlcenters enabled him to isolate and stimulate these centers while at the sametime removing the hormone-inhibitor producing portion of the cortex. Heexplained the enzyme-block theory and went on to describe my physicalcondition before and after surgery. Photographs (I didn't know they had beentaken) were passed around and commented on, and I could see by the nods andsmiles that most people there agreed with him that the "dull, vacuous facialexpression" had been transformed into an "alert, intelligent appearance." Healso discussed in detail the pertinent aspects of our therapysessions-especially my changing attitudes toward free association thecouch.
I had come there as part of a scientific presentation, and I had expected tobe put on exhibition, but everyone kept talking about me as if I were somekind of newly created thing they were presenting to the scientific world. Noone in this room considered me an individual human being. The constantjuxtaposition of "Algernon and-Charlie" and "Charlie and Algernon," made itclear that they thought of both of us as a couple of experimental animals whohad no existence outside the laboratory. But, aside from my anger, I couldn'tget it out of my mind that something was wrong.Finally, it was Nemur's turn to speak-to sum it all up as the head of theproject-to take the spotlight as the author of a brilliant experiment. Thiswas the day he had been waiting for.He was impressive as he stood up there on the platform, and, as he spoke, Ifound myself nodding with him, agreeing with things I knew to be true. Thetesting, the experiment, the surgery, and my subsequent mental developmentwere described at length, and his talk was enlivened by quotations from myprogress reports. More than once I found myself hearing something personal orfoolish read to this audience. Thank God I had been careful to keep most ofthe details about Alice and myself in my private file.Then, at one point in his summary, he said it: "We who have worked on thisproject at Beekman University have the satisfaction of knowing we have takenone of nature's mistakes and by our new techniques created a superior humanbeing. When Charlie came to us he was outside of society, alone in a greatcity without friends or relatives to care about him, without the mentalequipment to live a normal life. No past, no contact with the present, nohope for the future. It might be said that Charlie Gordon did not reallyexist before this experiment... ."
I don't know why I resented it so intensely to have them think of me assomething newly minted in their private treasury, but it was-I amcertain-echoes of that idea that had been sounding in the chambers of my mindfrom the time we had arrived in Chicago. I wanted to get up and show everyonewhat a fool he was, to shout at him: I'm a human being, a person-with parentsand memories and a history-and I was before you ever wheeled me into thatoperating room!
At the same time deep in the heat of my anger there was forged anoverwhelming insight into the thing that had disturbed me when Strauss spokeand again when Nemur amplified his data. They had made a mistake - ofcourse! The statistical evaluation of the waiting period necessary to provethe permanence of the change had been based on earlier experiments in thefield of mental development and learning, on waiting periods with normallydull or normally intelligent animals. But it was obvious that the waitingperiod would have to be extended in those cases where an animal'sintelligence had been increased two or three times.Nemur's conclusions had been premature. For both Algernon and myself, itwould take more time to see if this change would stick. The professors hadmade a mistake, and no one else had caught it. I wanted to jump up and tellthem, but I couldn't move. Like Algernon, I found myself behind the mesh ofthe cage they had built around me.
Now there would be a question period, and before would be allowed to havemy dinner, I would be required to perform before this distinguishedgathering. No, I had to get out of there."...In one sense, he was the result of modern psychologicalexperimentation. In place of a feeble-minded shell, a burden on the societythat must fear his irresponsible behavior, we have a man of dignity andsensitivity, ready to take his place as a contributing member of society. Ishould like you all to hear a few words from Charlie Gordon.."God damn him. He didn't know what he was talking about. At that point, thecompulsion overwhelmed me. I watched in fascination as my hand moved,independent of my will, to pull down the latch of Algernon's cage. As Iopened it he looked up at me and paused. Then he turned, darted out of hiscage, and scampered across the long table.
At first, he was lost against the damask tablecloth, a blur of white onwhite, until a woman at the table screamed, knocking her chair backwards asshe leaped to her feet. Beyond her, pitchers of water overturned, and thenBurt shouted. "Algernon's loose!" Algernon jumped down from the table, ontothe platform and then to the floor."Get him! Get him!" Nemur screeched as the audience, divided in its aims,became a tangle of arms and legs. Some of the women (non-experimentalists?)tried to stand on the unstable folding chairs while others, trying to help cornerAlgernon, knocked them over."Close those back doors!" shouted Burt, who realized Algernon was smartenough to head in that direction."Run," I heard myself shout. "The side door!""He's gone out the side door," someone echoed."Get him! Get him!" begged Nemur.
The crowd surged out of the Grand Ballroom into the corridor, as Algernon,scampering along the maroon carpeted hallway, led them a merry chase. UnderLouis XIV tables, around potted palms, up stairways, around corners, downstairways, into the main lobby, picking up other people as we went. Seeingthem all running back and forth in the lobby, chasing a white mouse smarterthan many of them, was the funniest thing that had happened in a long time."Go ahead, laugh!" snorted Nemur, who nearly bumped into me, "but if wedon't find him, the whole experiment is in danger."I pretended to be looking for Algernon under a waste basket. "Do you knowsomething?" I said. "You've made a mistake. And after today, maybe it justwon't matter at all."
Seconds later, half a dozen women came screaming out of the powder room,skirts clutched frantically around their legs."He's in there," someone yelled. But for a moment, the searching crowd wasstayed by the handwriting on the wall-Ladies. I was the first to cross theinvisible barrier and enter the sacred gates.Algernon was perched on top of one of the washbasins, glaring at hisreflection in the mirror."Come on," I said. "We'll get out of here together."He let me pick him up and put him into my jacket pocket. "Stay in therequietly until I tell you."The others came bursting through the swinging doors-looking guiltily as ifthey expected to see screaming nude females. I walked out as they searchedthe washroom, and I heard Burt's voice."There's a hole in that ventilator. Maybe he went up there.""Find out where it leads to," said Strauss."You go up to the second floor," said Nemur, waving to Strauss. "I'll godown to the basement."At this point they burst out of the ladies' room and the forces split. Ifollowed behind the Strauss contingent up to the second floor as they triedto discover where the ventilator led to. When Strauss and White and theirhalf-dozen followers turned right down Corridor B, I turned left up CorridorC and took the elevator to my room.I closed the door behind me, and patted my pocket. A pink snout and whitefuzz poked out and looked around. "I'll just get my things packed," Isaid, "and we'll take off-just you and me-a couple of man-made geniuses on therun."
I had the bellhop put the bags and the tape-recorder into a waiting taxi,paid my hotel bill, and walked out the revolving door with the object of thesearch nestling in my jacket pocket. I used my return-flight ticket to NewYork.Instead of going back to my place, I plan to stay at a hotel here in thecity for one or two nights. We'll use that as a base of operations while Ilook for a furnished apartment, somewhere midtown. I want to be near TimesSquare.Talking all this out makes me feel a lot better-even a little silly. I don'treally know why I got so upset, or what I'm doing on a jet heading back toNew York with Algernon in a shoebox under the seat. I mustn't panic. Themistake doesn't necessarily mean anything serious. It's just that things arenot as definite as Nemur believed. But where do I go from here?First, I've got to see my parents. As soon as I can.I may not have all the time I thought I had... .

%%%%%PROGRESS REPORT 14June 15 - Our escape hit the papers yesterday, and thetabloids had a field day. On the second page of the DailyPress there was an old picture of me and a sketch of awhite mouse. The headline read: Moron-Genius andMouse Go Berserk. Nemur and Strauss are reported assaying I had been under tremendous strain and that I would undoubtedlyreturn soon. They offered a five-hundred-dollar reward for Algernon, notrealizing we were together.When I turned to the later story on the fifth page, I was stunned to find apicture of my mother and sister. Some reporter had obviously done hislegwork.
SISTER UNAWARE OF MORON-GENIUS' WHEREABOUTS(Special to the Daily Press)Brooklyn, N.Y., June 14-Miss Norma Gordon, who lives with her mother, RoseGordon, at 4136 Marks Street, Brooklyn, N.Y., denied any knowledge of herbrother's whereabouts. Miss Gordon said, "We haven't seen him or heard fromhim in more than seventeen years."Miss Gordon says she believed her brother dead until last March, when thehead of the psychology department at Beekman University approached her forpermission to use Charlie in an experiment."My mother told me he had been sent to the Warren place,' (Warren State Homeand Training School, in Warren, Long Island) said Miss Gordon, "and that hedied there a few years later. I had no idea then that he was still alive."Miss Gordon requests that anyone who has any news about her brother'swhereabouts communicate with the family at their home address.The father, Matthew Gordon, who is not living with his wife and daughter,now operates a barber-shop in the Bronx.
I stared at the news story for a while, and then I turned back and looked atthe picture again. How can I describe them?I can't say I remember Rose's face. Although the recent photograph is aclear one, I still see it through the gauze of childhood. I knew her, and Ididn't know her. Had we passed on the street, I would not have recognizedher, but now, knowing she is my mother, I can make out the faint details-yes!Thin, drawn into exaggerated lines. Sharp nose and chin. And I can almosthear her chatter and bird-screech. Hair done up in a bun, severely. Piercingme with her dark eyes. I want her to take me into her arms and tell me I ama good boy, and at the same time I want to turn away to avoid a slap. Herpicture makes me tremble.
And Norma-thin-faced too. Features not so sharp, pretty, but very much like mymother. Her hair worn down to her shoulders softens her. The two of them aresitting on the living room couch.It was Rose's face that brought back the frightening memories. She was twopeople to me, and I never had any way of knowing which she would be. Perhapsshe would reveal it to others by a gesture of hand, a raised eyebrow, afrown-my sister knew the storm warnings, and she would always be out of rangewhenever my mother's temper flared-but it always caught me unawares. I wouldcome to her for comforting, and her anger would break over me.And other times there would be tenderness and holding-close like a warmbath, and hands stroking my hair and brow, and the words carved above thecathedral of my childhood:He's like all the other children.- He's a good boy. -I see back through the dissolving photograph, myself and father leaning overa bassinet. He's holding me by the hand and saying, "There she is. Youmustn't touch her because she's very little, but when she gets bigger you'llhave a sister to play with."I see my mother in the huge bed nearby, bleached and pasty, arms limp on theorchid-figured comforter, raising her head anxiously. "Watch him, Matt-"That was before she had changed towards me, and now I realize it was becauseshe had no way of knowing yet if Norma would be like me or not. It was lateron, when she was sure her prayers had been answered, and Norma showed allsigns of normal intelligence, that my mother's voice began to sounddifferent. Not only her voice, but her touch her look, her very presence-allchanged. It was as if her magnetic poles had reversed and where they had onceattracted now repelled. I see now that when Norma flowered in our garden Ibecame a weed, allowed to exist only where I would not be seen, in cornersand dark places.
Seeing her face in the newspaper, I suddenly hated her. It would have beenbetter if she had ignored the doctors and teachers and others who were so in ahurry to convince her that I was a moron, turning her away from me so that shegave me less love when I needed more.What good would it do to see her now? What could she tell me about myself? Andyet, I'm curious. How would she react?To see her and trace back to learn what I was? Or to forget her? Is the pastworth knowing? Why is it so important for me to say to her:"Mom, look at me. I'm not retarded any more. I'm normal. Better thannormal. I'm a genius?"
Even as I try to get her out of my mind, the memories seep back from thepast to contaminate the here and now. Another memory-when I was much older.A quarrel.Charlie lying in bed, with the covers pulled up around him. The room dark,except for the thin line of yellow light from the door ajar that penetratesthe darkness to join both worlds. And he hears things, not understanding butfeeling, because the rasp of their voices is linked to their talk of him. Moreand more, each day, he comes to associate that tone with a frown whenthey speak of him.He has been almost asleep when through the bar of Tight the soft voices wereraised to the pitch of argument-his mother's voice sharp with the threat ofone used to having her way through hysteria. "He's got to be sent away. Idon't want him in the house any more with her. Call Dr Portman and tell himwe want to send Charlie to the Warren State Home."My father's voice is firm, steadying. "But you know Charlie wouldn't harmher. It can't make any difference to her at this age.""How do we know? Maybe it has a bad effect on a child to grow up with...someone like him in the house."
"Dr Portman said""Portman said! Portman said! I don't care what he said! Think of what itwill be like for her to have a brother like that. I was wrong all theseyears, trying to believe he would grow up like other children. I admit itnow. Better for him to be put away.""Now that you've got her, you've decided you don't want him any more...""Do you think this is easy? Why are you making it harder for me? All theseyears everyone telling me he should be put away. Well, they were right. Puthim away. Maybe at the Home with his own kind he'll have something. I don'tknow what's right or wrong any more. All I know is I'm not going to sacrificemy daughter for him now."And though Charlie has not understood what passed between them, he is afraidand sinks beneath the covers, eyes open, trying to pierce the darkness thatsurrounds him.
As I see him now, he is not really afraid, just withdrawing, as a bird orsquirrel backs off from the brusque movements of the feeder-involuntary,instinctive. The light through that door ajar comes to me again in luminousvision. Seeing Charlie huddled beneath the covers I wish I could give himcomfort, explain to him that he has done nothing wrong, that it is beyond himto change his mother's attitude back to what it was before his sister came. Thereon the bed, Charlie did not understand what they were saying, but nowit hurts. If I could reach out into the past of my memories, I would make hersee how much she was hurting me.This is no time to go to her. Not until I've had time to work it out formyself.
Fortunately, as a precaution, I withdrew my savings from the bank as soon asI arrived in New York. Eight hundred and eighty-six dollars won't last long,but it will give me time to get my bearings.I've checked into the Camden Hotel on 41st Street, a block from TimesSquare. New York! All the things I've read about itl Gotham... the meltingpot... Baghdad-on-the-Hudson. City of light and color. Incredible thatI've lived and worked all my life just a few stops away on the subway andbeen to Times Square only once-with Alice.It's hard to keep from calling her. I've started and stopped myself severaltimes. I've got to keep away from her.So many confusing thoughts to get down. I tell myself that as long as I keeptaping my progress reports, nothing will be lost; the record will becomplete. Let them be in the dark for a while; I was in the dark for morethan thirty years. But I'm tired now. Didn't get to sleep on the planeyesterday, and I can't keep my eyes open. I'll pick up at this pointtomorrow.
June 16 - Called Alice, but hung up before she answered. Today I found afurnished apartment. Ninety-five dollars a month is more than I planned tospend, but it's on Forty-third and Tenth Avenue and I can get to the libraryin ten minutes to keep up with my reading and study. The apartment is on thefourth floor, four rooms, and there's a rented piano in it. The landlady saysthat one of these days the rental service will pull it out, but maybe by thattime I can learn to play it.
Algernon is a pleasant companion. At mealtimes he takes his place at thesmall gateleg table. He likes pretzels, and today he took a sip of beer whilewe watched the ball game on TV. I think he rooted for the Yankees.I'm going to move most of the furniture out of the second bedroom and usethe room for Algernon. I plan to build him a three-dimensional maze out ofscrap plastic that I can pick up cheaply downtown. There are some complexmaze variations I'd like him to learn to be sure he, keeps in shape. But I'mgoing to see if I can find some motivation other than food. There must beother rewards that will induce him to solve problems.Solitude gives me a chance to read and think, and now that the memories arecoming through again-to rediscover my past, to find out who and what I reallyam. If anything should go wrong, I'll have at least that.June 19 - Met Fay Lillman, my neighbor across the hall. When I came back withan armful of groceries, I discovered I had locked myself out, and Iremembered that the front fire escape connected my living room window and theapartment directly across the hall.The radio was on loud and brassy, so I knockedsoftly at first, and thenlouder.
"Come on in! Door's open!"I pushed the door, and froze, because standing in front of an easel, painting, wasa slender blonde in pink bra and panties."Sorry!" I gasped, closing the door again. From outside, I shouted. "I'myour neighbor across the hall. I locked myself out, and I wanted to use thefire escape to get over to my window."The door swung open and she faced me, still in her underwear, a brush ineach hand and hands on her hips."Didn't you hear me say come in?" She waved me into the apartment, pushingaway a carton full of trash. "Just step over that pile of junk there."I thought she must have forgotten-or not realized-she was undressed, and Ididn't know which way to look. I kept my eyes averted, looking at the walls,ceiling, everywhere but at her.
The place was a shambles. There were dozens of little folding snack-tables,all covered with twisted tubes of paint, most of them crusted dry likeshriveled snakes, but some of them alive and oozing ribbons of color. Tubes,brushes, cans, rags, and parts of frames and canvas were strewn everywhere.The place was thick with the odor compounded of paint, linseed oil, andturpentine-and after a few moments the subtle aroma of stale beer. Threeoverstuffed chairs and a mangy green couch were piled high with discardedclothing, and on the floor lay shoes, stockings and underthings, as if shewere in the habit of undressing as she walked and flinging her clothes as shewent. A fine layer of dust covered everything.
"Well, you're Mr Gordon," she said, looking me over. "I've been dying toget a peek at you ever since you moved in. Have a seat." She scooped up apile of clothing from one of the chairs and dumped it onto the crowded sofa."So you finally decided to visit your neighbors. Get you a drink?""You're a painter," I burbled, for want of something to say. I was unnervedby the thought that any moment she would realize she was undressed and wouldscream and dash for the bedroom. I tried to keep my eyes moving, lookingeverywhere but at her.
"Beer or ale? Nothing else in the place right now except cooking sherry. Youdon't want cooking sherry, do you?""I can't stay," I said, getting hold of myself and fixing my gaze at the beautymark on the left side of her chin. "I've locked myself out of my apartment. Iwanted to go across the fire escape. It connects our windows.""Any time," she assured me. "Those lousy patent locks are a pain in the ass. Ilocked myself out of this place three times the first week I lived here-andonce I was out in the hall stark naked for half an hour. Stepped out to getthe milk, and the goddamned door swung shut behind me. I ripped the goddamnedlock off and I haven't had one on my door since."I must have frowned, because she laughed. "Well, you see what the damnedlocks do. They lock you out, and they don't protect much, do they? Fifteenburglaries in this goddamned building in the past year and every one of themin apartments that were locked. No one ever broke in here, even though thedoor was always open. They'd have a rotten time finding anything valuablehere anyway."
When she insisted again on my having a beer with her, I accepted. While shewas getting it from the kitchen, I looked around the room again. What Ihadn't noticed before was that the part of the wall behind me had beencleared away-all the furniture pushed to one side of the room or the center,so that the far wall (the plaster of which had been torn off to expose thebrick) served as an art gallery. Paintings were crowded to the ceiling andothers were stacked against each other on the floor. Several of them wereself-portraits, including two nudes. The painting she had been working onwhen I came in, the one on the easel, was a half-length nude of herself,showing her hair long (not the way she wore it now, up in blonde braidscoiled around her head like a crown) down to her shoulders with part of herlong tresses twisted around the front and resting between her breasts. Shehad painted her breasts uptilted and firm with the nipples an unrealisticlollipop-red. When I heard her coming back with the beer, I spun away fromthe easel quickly, stumbled over some books, and pretended to be interestedin a small autumn landscape on the wall.
I was relieved to see that she had slipped into a thin ragged housecoat-eventhough it had holes in all the wrong places-and I could look directly at herfor the first time. Not exactly beautiful, but her blue eyes and pert snub nose gaveher a catlike quality that contrasted with her robust, athletic movements.She was about thirty-five, slender and well proportioned. She set the beerson the hardwood floor, curled up beside them in front of the sofa, andmotioned for me to do the same.
"I find the floor more comfortable than chairs," she said, sipping the beerfrom the can. "Don't you?"I told her I hadn't thought about it, and she laughed and said I had anhonest face. She was in the mood to talk about herself. She avoided GreenwichVillage, she said, because there, instead of painting, she would be spendingall her time in bars and coffee shops. "It's better up here, away from thephonies and the dilettantes. Here I can do what I want and no one comes tosneer. You're not a sneerer, are you?"I shrugged, trying not to notice the gritty dust all over my trousers and myhands. "I guess we all sneer at something. You're sneering at the phonies anddilettantes, aren't you?"After a while, I said I'd better be getting over to my own apartment. Shepushed a pile of books away from the window-and I climbed over newspapers andpaper bags filled with empty quart beer bottles. "One of these days," shesighed, "I've got to cash them in."I climbed onto the window sill and out to the fire escape. When I got mywindow open, I came back for my groceries, but before I could say thanks andgood-bye, she started out onto the fire escape after me. "Let's see yourplace. I've never been there. Before you moved in, the two little old Wagnersisters wouldn't even say good morning to me." She crawled through my windowbehind me and sat on the ledge."Come on in," I said, putting the groceries on the table."I don't have any beer, but I can make you a cup of coffee." But she waslooking past me, her eyes wide in disbelief."My God! I've never seen a place as neat as this. Who would dream that a manliving by himself could keep a place so orderly?""I wasn't always that way," I apologized. "It's just since I moved in here. Itwas neat when I moved in, and I've had the compulsion to keep it that way. Itupsets me now if anything is out of place."She got down off the window sill to explore the apartment."Hey," she said, suddenly, "do you like to dance? You know-" She held outher arms and did a complicated step as she hummed a Latin beat. "Tell me youdance and I'll bust.""Only the fox trot," I said, "and not very good at that."She shrugged. "I'm nuts about dancing, but nobody Iever meet that I like-is a good dancer. I've got to getmyself all dolled up once in a while and go downtown tothe Stardust Ballroom. Most of the guys hanging aroundthere are kind of creepy, but they can dance."She sighed as she looked around. "Tell you what I don't like about a placeso goddamned orderly like this. As an artist... it's the lines that getme. All the straight lines in the walls, on the floors, in the corners thatturn into boxes-like coffins. The only way I can get rid of the boxes is totake a few drinks. Then all the lines get wavy and wiggly, and I feel a lotbetter about the whole world. When things are all straight and lined up thisway I get morbid. Ugh! If I lived here I would have to stay drunk all thetime."
Suddenly, she swung around and faced me. "Say, could you let me have fiveuntil the twentieth? That's when my alimony check comes. I usually don't runshort, but I bad a problem last week."Before I could answer, she screeched and started over to the piano in thecorner. "I used to play the piano. I heard you fooling around with it a fewtimes, and I said to myself that guy's goddamned good. That's how I know Iwanted to meet you even before I saw you. I haven't played in such agoddamned long time." She was picking away at the piano as I went into thekitchen to make coffee.
"You're welcome to practice on it any time," I said I don't know why Isuddenly became so free with my place, but there was something about her thatdemanded complete unselfishness. "I don't leave the front door open yet, butthe window isn't locked, and if I'm not here all you've got to do is climb inthrough the fire escape. Cream and sugar in your coffee?"When she didn't answer, I looked back into the living room. She wasn'tthere, and as I started towards the window, I heard her voice from Algernon'sroom.
"Hey, what's this?" She was examining the three dimensional plastic maze Ihad built. She studied it and then let out another squeal. "Modern sculpturelAll boxes and straight lines!""It's a special maze," I explained. "A complex learning device forAlgernon."But she was circling around it, excited. "They'll go mad for it at theMuseum of Modern Art.""It's not sculpture," I insisted. I opened the door to Algernon'sliving-cage attached to the maze, and let him into the maze opening."My God!" she whispered. "Sculpture with a living element. Charlie, it's thegreatest thing since junkmobiles and tincannia."I tried to explain, but she insisted that the living element would makesculpture history. Only when I saw the laughter in her wild eyes did Irealize she was teasing me. "It could be self-perpetuating art," she went on,"a creative experience for the art lover. You get another mouse and when theyhave babies, you always keep one to reproduce the living element. Your workof art attains immortality, and all the fashionable people buy copies forconversation pieces. What are you going to call it?"
"All right," I sighed. "I surrender....""No," she snorted, tapping the plastic dome where Algernon had found his wayinto the goal-box."Surrender is too much of a cliche. How about: Life is just a box of mazes?""You're a nut!" I said."Naturally!" She spun around and curtsied. "I was wondering when you'dnotice."About then the coffee boiled over.Halfway through the cup of coffee, she gasped and said she had to runbecause she had a date a half-hour earlier with someone she met at an artexhibit.
"You wanted some money," I said.She reached into my half open wallet and pulled out a five-dollar bill."Till next week," she said, "when the check comes. Thanksa mill." She crumpled the money, blew Algernon a kiss, and before I could sayanything she was out the window onto the fire escape, and out of sight. Istood there foolishly looking after her.So damned attractive. So full of life and excitement. Her voice, hereyes-everything about her was an invitation. And she lived out the window andjust a fire escape away.June 20 - Perhaps I should have waited before going to see Matt; or not gone tosee him at all. I don't know. Nothing turns out the way I expect it to. Withthe clue that Matt had opened a barbershop somewhere in the Bronx, it was asimple matter to find him. I remembered he had sold for a barber supplycompany in New York. That led me to Metro Barber Shop Supplies who had abarbershop account under the name of Gordons Barber Shop on Wentworth Streetin the Bronx.
Matt had often talked about a barbershop of his own. How he hatedselling! What battles they had about it! Rose screaming that a salesman wasat least a dignified occupation, but she would never have a barber for ahusband. And oh, wouldn't Margaret Phinney snicker at the "barber's wife. Andwhat about Lois Meiner whose husband was a claims examiner for the Alarm CasualtyCompany? Wouldn't she stick her nose up in the air!
During the years he worked as a salesman, hating every day of it (especiallyafter he saw the movie version of Death of a Salesman) Matt dreamed that hewould someday become his own boss. That must have been in his mind in thosedays when he talked about saving money and gave me my haircuts down in thebasement. They were good haircuts too, he boasted, a lot better than I'd getin that cheap barbershop on Scales Avenue. When he walked out on Rose, hewalked out on selling too, and I admired him for that.
I was excited at the thought of seeing him. Memories were warm ones. Matthad been willing to take me as I was. Before Norma: the arguments thatweren't about money or impressing the neighbors were about me-that I shouldbe let alone instead of being pushed to do what other kids did. And afterNorma: that I had a right to a life of my own even though I wasn't like otherchildren. Always defending me. I couldn't wait to see the expression on hisface. He was someone I'd be able to share this with.
Wentworth Street was a rundown section of the Bronx. Most of the stores onthe street had "For Rent" signs in the windows, and others were closed forthe day. But halfway down the block from the bus stop there was a barber polereflecting a candy cane of light from the window.The shop was empty except for the barber reading a magazine in the chairnearest the window. When he looked up at me, I recognized Matt-stocky, redcheeked,a lot older and nearly bald with a fringe of gray hair bordering thesides of his head-but still Matt. Seeing me at the door, he tossed themagazine aside.
"No waiting. You're next."I hesitated, and he misunderstood. "Usually not open at this hour, mister. Hadan appointment with one of my regulars, but he didn't show. Just about toclose. Lucky for you I sat down to rest my feet. Best haircut and shave inthe Bronx."
As I let myself be drawn into the shop, he bustled around, pulling outscissors and combs and a fresh neckcloth."Everything sanitary, as you can see, which is more than I can say for mostbarbershops in this neighborhood. Haircut and shave?"I eased myself into the chair. Incredible that he didn't recognize me whenI knew him so plainly. I had to remind myself that he had not seen me in morethan fifteen years, and that my appearance had changed even more in the pastmonths. He studied me in the mirror now that he had me covered with thestriped neckcloth, and I saw a frown of faint recognition."The works," I said, nodding at the union-shop price list, "haircut, shave,shampoo, sun-tan ..:'His eyebrows went up.
"I've got to meet someone I haven't seen in a long time," I assured him, "andI want to look my best."
It was a frightening sensation, having him cut my hair again. Later, as hestropped the razor against leather the harsh whisper made me cringe. I bentmy head under the gentle press of his hand and felt the blade scrape carefullyacross my neck. I closed my eyes and waited. It was as if I were on theoperating table again.
My neck muscle knotted, and without warning it twitched. The blade nicked mejust above the Adam's apple.
"Hey!" he shouted. "Jesus... take it easy. You moved. Hey, I'm awfulsorry."He dashed to wet a towel at the sink.In the mirror I watched the bright red bubble and the thin line drippingdown my throat. Excited and apologizing, he got to it before it reached theneckcloth.Watching him move, adroit for such a short, heavy man, I felt guilty at thedeception. I wanted to tell hint who I was and have him put his arm around myshoulder, so we could talk about the old days. But I waited while he dabbedat the cut with styptic powder.He finished shaving me silently, and then brought the sun-tan lamp over tothe chair and put cool white pads of cotton soaked in witch hazel over myeyes. There, in the bright red inner darkness I saw what happened the nighthe took me away from the house for the last time... .Charlie is asleep in the other room, but he wakens to the sound of hismother shrieking. He has learned to sleep through quarrels-they are aneveryday occurrence in his house. But tonight there is something terriblywrong in that hysteria. He shrinks back into the pillow and listens."I can't help it! He's got to go! We've got her to think about. I won't haveher come home from school crying every day like this because the childrentease her. We can't destroy her chance for a normal life because of.."What do you want to do? Turn him out into the street?""Put him away. Send him to the Warren State Home.""Let's talk it over in the morning."
"No. All you do is talk, talk, and you don't do anything. I don't want himhere another day. Now-tonight.""Don't be foolish, Rose. It's too late to do anything... tonight You'reshouting so loud everyone will hear you.""I don't care. He goes out tonight. I can't stand looking at him any more.""You're being impossible, Rose. What are you doing?""I warn you. Get him out of here.""Put that knife down.""I'm not going to have her life destroyed.""You're crazy. Put that knife away.""He's better off dead. He'll never be able to live a normal life. He'll bebetter off-""You're out of your mind. For God's sake, control yourself!""Then take him away from here. Now tonight.""All right. I'll take him over to Herman tonight and maybe tomorrow we'llfind out about getting him into the Warren State Home."There is silence. From the darkness I feel the shudder pass over the house,and then Matt's voice, less panicky than hers. "I know what you've gonethrough with him, and I can't blame you for being afraid. But you've got tocontrol yourself. I'll take him over to Herman. Will that satisfy you?""That's all I ask. Your daughter is entitled to a life, too."Matt comes into Charlie's room and dresses his son, and though the boydoesn't understand what is happening, he is afraid. As they go out the door,she looks away. Perhaps she is trying to convince herself that he has alreadygone out of her life,-that he no longer exists. On the way out, Charlie seeson the kitchen table the long carving knife she cuts roasts with, and hesenses vaguely that she wanted to hurt him. She wanted to take something awayfrom him, and give it to Norma.When he looks back at her, she has picked up a rag to wash the kitchen sink
....When the haircut, shave, sun treatment, and the rest were over, I sat in thechair limply, feeling light, and slick, and clean, and Matt whisked theneckcloth off and offered me a second mirror to see the reflection of theback of my head. Seeing myself in the front mirror looking into the backmirror, as he held it for me, it tilted for an instant into the one anglethat produced the illusion of depth; endless corridors of myself...looking at myself...looking at myself... looking at myself... lookingWhich one? Who was I?
I thought of not telling him. What good was it for him to know? Just go awayand not reveal who I was. Then I remembered that I wanted him to know. He hadto admit that I was alive, that I was someone. I wanted him to boast about meto the customers tomorrow as he gave haircuts and shaves. That would make itall real. If he knew I was his son, then I would be a person."Now that you've got the hair off my face, maybe you'll know me," I said asI stood up, waiting for a sign of recognition.He frowned. "What is this? A gag?"
I assured him it was not a gag, and if he looked and thought hard enough hewould know me. He shrugged and turned to put his combs and scissors away. "Igot no time for guessing games. Got to close up. That'll be three-fifty."What if he didn't remember me? What if this was only an absurd fantasy? Hishand was out for the money, but I made no move toward my wallet. He had toremember me. He had to know me. But no - of course not and as I felt thesour taste in my mouth and the sweat in my palms, I knew that in a minuteI would be sick. But I didn't want that in front of him."Hey, you all right?"
"Yes... just... wait ..." I stumbled into one of the chrome chairsand bent forward gasping for breath, waiting for the blood to come back to myhead. My stomach was churning. Oh, God, don't let me faint now. Don't let melook ridiculous in front of him.
"Water... some water, please ..:' Not so much for the drink as to makehim turn away. I didn't want him to see me like this after all these years. Bythe time he returned with a glass, I felt a little better."Here, drink this. Rest a minute. You'll be okay." He stared at me as Isipped the cool water, and I could see him struggling with half-forgottenmemories. "Do I really know you from somewhere?""No... I'm okay. I'll leave in a minute."How could I tell him? What was I supposed to say?Here, look at me, I'm Charlie, the son you wrote off the books? Not that Iblame you for it, but here I am, all fixed up better than ever. Test me. Askme questions. I speak twenty languages, living and dead; I'm a mathematicalwhiz, and I'm writing a piano concerto that will make them remember me longafter I'm gone.
How could I tell him?How absurd I was sitting in his shop, waiting for him to pat me on the headand say, "Good boy." I wanted his approval, the old glow of satisfaction thatcame to his face when I learned to tie my own shoelaces and button mysweater. I had come here for that look in his face, but I knew I wouldn't getit.
"You want me to call a doctor?"I wasn't his son. That was another Charlie. Intelligence and knowledge hadchanged me, and he would resent me-as the others from the bakery resentedme-because my growth diminished him. I didn't want that."I'm okay," I said. "Sorry to be a nuisance" I got up and tested my legs."Something I ate. I'll let you close up now."
As I headed towards the door, his voice called after me sharply. "Hey, waita minutel" His eyes met mine with suspicion. "What are you trying to pull?""I don't understand."
His hand was out, rubbing his thumb and forefinger together."You owe me three-fifty."I apologized as I paid him, but I could see that he didn't believe it. Igave him five, told him to keep the change, and hurried out of his barbershopwithout looking back.
June 21 - I've added time sequences of increasing complexity to thethree-dimensional maze, and Algernonlearns them easily. There is no need to motivate him withfood or water. He appears to learn for the sake of solvingthe problem-success appears to be its own reward.But, as Burt pointed out at the convention, his behavior is erratic.Sometimes after, or even during a run, he will rage, throw himself againstthe walls of the maze, or curl up and refuse to work at all. Frustration? Orsomething deeper?
5:30 P.M.-That crazy Fay came in through the fire escape this afternoon witha female white mouse-about half Algernon's size-to keep him company, shesaid, on these lonely summer nights. She quickly overcame all my objectionsand convinced me that it would do Algernon good to have companionship. AfterI assured myself that little "Minnie" was of sound health and good moralcharacter, I agreed. I was curious to see what he would do when confrontedwith a female. But once we had put Minnie into Algernon's cage, Fay grabbedmy arm and pulled me out of the room.
"Where's your sense of romance?" she insisted. She turned on the radio, andadvanced toward me menacingly. "I'm going to teach you the latest steps."How can you get annoyed at a girl like Fay?At any rate, I'm glad that Algernon is no longer alone.June 23 - Late last night the sound of laughter in thehallway and a tapping on my door. It was Fay and aman.
"Hi, Charlie," she giggled as she saw me. "Leroy, meet Charlie. He's myacross-the-hall neighbor. A wonderful artist. He does sculpture with a livingelement."
Leroy caught hold of her and kept her from bumping into the wall. He lookedat me nervously and mumbled a greeting."Met Leroy at the Stardust Ballroom," she explained. "He's a terrificdancer." She started into her apartment and then pulled him back. "Hey," shegiggled, "why don't we invite Charlie over for a drink and make it a party?"Leroy didn't think it was a good idea.
I managed an apology and pulled away. Behind my closed door, I heard themlaughing their way into her apartment, and though I tried to read, thepictures kept forcing their way into my mind: a big white bed... whitecool sheets and the two of them in each other's arms.I wanted to phone Alice, but I didn't. Why torment myself? I couldn't evenvisualize Alice's face. I could picture Fay, dressed or undressed, at will,with her crisp blue eyes and her blonde hair braided and coiled around herhead like a crown. Fay was clear, 'but Alice was wrapped in mist.About an hour later I heard shouting from Fay's apartment, then her screamand the sound of things beingthrown, but as I started out of bed to see if she neededhelp, I heard the door slam Leroy cursing as he left. Then, a few minutesafterward, I heard a tapping on my living room window. It was open, and Fay slipped inandsat on the ledge, a black silk kimono revealing lovely legs."Hi," she whispered, "got a cigareet?"
I handed her one and she slipped down from the window ledge to the couch."Whew!" she sighed, "I can usually take care of myself, but there's one typethat's so hungry it's all you can do to hold them off.""Oh," I said, "you brought him up here to hold him off."She caught my tone and looked up sharply. "You don't approve?""Who am I to disapprove? But if you pick up a guy in a public dance hallyou've got to expect advances. He had the right to make a pass at you."She shook her head. "I go to the Stardust Ballroom because I like to dance,and I don't see that because I let a guy bring me home I've got to go to bedwith him. You don't think I went to bed with him, do you?"My image of the two of them in each other's arms popped like soap bubbles."Now if you were the guy," she said, "it would be different.""What is that supposed to mean?"
"Just what it sounds like. If you asked me, I'd go to bed with you."I tried to keep my composure. "Thanks," I said. "I'll keep that in mind. CanI get you a cup of coffee?"
"Charlie, I can't figure you out. Most men like me or not, and I know itright away. But you seem afraid of me. You're not a homosexual, are you?""Hell, not"
"I mean you don't have to hide it from me if you are, because then we couldbe just good friends. But I'd have to know.""I'm not a homosexual. Tonight, when you went into your place with that guy, Iwished it was me."
She leaned forward and the kimono open at the neck revealed her bosom. Sheslipped her arms around me, waiting for me to do something. I knew what wasexpected of me, and I told myself there was no reason not to. I had the feelingthere would be no panic now - not with her. After all, I wasn't the one makingthe advances. And she was different from any woman I'd ever met before. Perhapsshe was right for me at this emotional level. I slipped my arms around her."That's different," she cooed. "I was beginning to think you didn't care.""I care," I whispered, kissing her throat. But as I did it, I saw the two ofus, as if I were a third person standing in the doorway. I was watching a manand woman in each other's arms. But seeing myself that way, from a distance,left me unresponsive. There was no panic, it was true, but there was also noexcitement-no desire.
"Your place or mine?" she asked."Wait a minute.""What's the matter?""Maybe we'd better not. I don't feel well this evening."She looked at me wonderingly. "Is there anything else?... Anything youwant me to do?... I don't mind ..""No, that's not it," I said sharply. "I just don't feel well tonight." I wascurious about the ways she had of getting a man excited, but this was no timeto start experimenting. The solution to my problem lay elsewhere.I didn't know what else to say to her. I wished she'd go away, but I didn'twant to tell her to go. She was studying me, and then finally she said,"Look, do you mind if I spend the night here?""Why?"
She shrugged. "I like you. I don't know. Leroy might come back. Lots ofreasons. If you don't want me to... "She caught me off guard again. I might have found a dozen excuses to get ridof her, but I gave in."Got any gin?" she asked."No, I don't drink much.""I've got some in my place. I'll bring it over." Before I could stop her shewas out the window and a few minutes later she returned with a bottle abouttwo-thirds full, and a lemon. She took two glasses from my kitchen and pouredsome gin into each. "Here," she said, "this'll make you feel better. It'll takethe starch out of those straight lines. That's what's bugging you. Everything istoo neat and straight and you're all boxed in. Like Algernon in his sculpture there."I wasn't going to at first, but I felt so lousy that I figured why not. Itcouldn't make things any worse, and it might possibly dull the feeling thatI was watching myself through eyes that didn't understand what I was doing.She got me drunk.
I remember the first drink, and getting into bed, and her slipping in besideme with the bottle in her hand. And that was all until this afternoon when Igot up with a hangover.She was still asleep, face to the wall, her pillow bunched up under herneck. On the night table beside the ash tray overflowing with crushed buttsstood the empty bottle, but the last thing I remembered before the curtaincame down was watching myself take the second drink.She stretched and rolled toward me-nude. I moved back and fell out of bed. Igrabbed a blanket to wrap around myself.
"Hi," she yawned. "You know what I want to do one of these days?""What?""Paint you in the nude. Like Michelangelo's `David.' You'd be beautiful. Youokay?"I nodded. "Except for a headache. Did I-uh-drink too much last night?"She laughed and propped herself up on one elbow. "You were loaded. And boydid you act queer-I don't mean fairyish or anything like that but strange.""What"-I said, struggling to work the blanket around so that I couldwalk-"is that supposed to mean? What did I do?"
"I've seen guys get happy, or sad, or sleepy, or sexy, but I never sawanyone act the way you did. It's a good thing you don't drink often. Oh, myGod, I only wish I had a camera. What a short subject you'd have made.""Well, for Christ's sake, what'd I do?"
"Not what I expected. No sex, or anything like that. But you werephenomenal. What an act! The weirdest. You'd be great on the stage. You'd wowthem at the Palace. You went all confused and silly. You know, as if a grownman starts acting like a kid. Talking about how you wanted to go to schooland learn to read and write so you could be smart like everyone else.Crazy stuff like that. You were a different person-like they do withmethod-acting-and you kept saying you couldn't play with me because yourmother would take away your peanuts and put you in a cage.""Peanuts?"
"Yeah! So help me!" she laughed, scratching her head. "And you kept sayingI couldn't have your peanuts. The weirdest. But I tell you, the way youtalked! Like those dimwits on street corners, who work themselves up by justlooking at a girl. A different guy completely. At first I thought you werejust kidding around, but now I think you're compulsive or something. All thisneatness and worrying about everything."It didn't upset me, although I would have expected it to. Somehow, gettingdrunk had momentarily broken down the conscious barriers that kept the oldCharlie Gordon hidden deep in my mind. As I suspected all along, he was notreally gone. Nothing in our minds is ever really gone. The operation hadcovered him over with a veneer of education and culture, but emotionally hewas there-watching and waiting.
What was he waiting for?"You okay now?"I told her I was fine.She grabbed the blanket I was wrapped in, and pulled me back into bed. Before Icould stop her she slipped her arms around me and kissed me. "I wasscared last night, Charlie. I thought you flipped. I've heard about guys whoare impotent, how it suddenly gets them and they become maniacs.""How come you stayed?"
She shrugged. "Well, you were like a scared little kid. I was sure youwouldn't hurt me, but I thought you might hurt yourself. So I figured I'dhang around. I felt so sorry. Anyway, I kept this handy, just in case... "She pulled out a heavy book end she had wedged between the bed and the wall."I guess you didn't have to use it."
She shook her head. "Boy, you must have liked peanuts when you were a kid."She got out of bed and started to dress. I lay there for a while watchingher. She moved in front of me with no shyness or inhibition. Her breasts werefull as she had painted them in that self-portrait. I longed to reach out forher, but I knew it was futile. In spite of the operation Charlie was stillwith me.
And Charlie was afraid of losing his peanuts.June 24 - Today I went on a strange kind of antiintellectual binge. If I haddared to, I would have gotten drunk, but after the experience with Fay, Iknew it would be dangerous. So, instead, I went to Times Square, from moviehouse to movie house, immersing myself in westerns and horror movies-the wayI used to. Each time, sitting through the picture, I would find myselfwhipped with guilt. I'd walk out in the middle of the picture and wander intoanother one. I told myself I was looking for something in the make-believescreen world that was missing from my new life.Then, in a sudden intuition, right outside the Keno Amusement Center, I knewit wasn't the movies I wanted, but the audiences. I wanted to be with thepeople around me in the darkness.
The walls between people are thin here, and if I listenquietly, I hear what is going on. Greenwich Village is likethat too. Not just being close-because I don't feel it in acrowded elevator or on the subway during the rush buton a hot night when everyone is out walking, or sitting inthe theater, there is a rustling, and for a moment I brushagainst someone and sense the connection between thebranch and trunk and the deep root. At such momentsmy flesh is thin and tight, and the unbearable hunger tobe part of it drives me out to search in the dark cornersand blind alleys of the night.
Usually, when I'm exhausted from walking, I go back to the apartment anddrop off into a deep sleep, but tonight instead of going up to my own placeI went to the diner. There was a new dishwasher, a boy of about sixteen, andthere was something familiar about him, his movements, the look in his eyes. Andthen, clearing away the table behind me, he dropped some dishes.They crashed to the floor, shattering and sending bits of white china underthe tables. He stood there, dazed and frightened, holding the empty tray in hishand. The whistles and catcalls from the customers (cries of "hey, there go theprofits!"... "Mazel tov!" ...and "well, he didn't work here very long .." whichinvariably seems to follow the breaking of dishware in a public restaurant)confused him.
When the owner came to see what the excitement was about, the boycowered-threw up his arms as if to ward off a blow."All right! All right, you dope," shouted the man, "don't just stand there! Get thebroom and sweep up that mess. A broom ..a broom! you idiot! It's in the kitchen. Sweepup all the pieces."
When the boy saw that he was not going to be punished, his frightenedexpression disappeared, and he smiled and hummed as he came back with thebroom. A few of the rowdier customers kept up the remarks, amusing themselvesat his expense.
"Here, sonny, over here. There's a nice piece behind you ..: '"C'mon, do it again...""He's not so dumb. It's easier to break 'em than to wash 'em ..: 'As the boy's vacant eyes moved across the crowd of amused onlookers, heslowly mirrored their smiles and finally broke into an uncertain grin at thejoke which he did not understand.
I felt sick inside as I looked at his dull, vacuous smile-the wide, brighteyes of a child, uncertain but eager to please, and I realized what I hadrecognized in him. They were laughing at him because he was retarded.And at first I had been amused along with the rest.Suddenly, I was furious at myself and all those who were smirking at him. Iwanted to pick up the dishes and throw them. I wanted to smash their laughingfaces. I jumped up and shouted: "Shut up! Leave him alone! He can'tunderstand. He can't help what he is... but for God's sake, have somerespectl He's a human beingl"
The restaurant grew silent. I cursed myself for losing control and creatinga scene, and I tried not to look at the boy as I paid my check and walked outwithout touching my food. I felt ashamed for both of us.How strange it is that people of honest feelings and sensibility, who would nottake advantage of a man born without arms or legs or eyes-how such people thinknothing of abusing a man born with low intelligence. Itinfuriated me to remember that not too long ago I - like this boy had foolishlyplayed the clown. And I had almost forgotten.
Only a short time ago, I learned that people laughed at me. Now I can seethat unknowingly I joined them in laughing at myself. That hurts most of all.I have often reread my early progress reports and seen the illiteracy, thechildish naivete, the mind of low intelligence peering from a dark room,through the keyhole, at the dazzling light outside. In my dreams and memoriesI've seen Charlie smiling happily and uncertainly at what people around himwere saying. Even in my dullness I knew I was inferior. Other people hadsomething I lacked-something denied me. In my mental blindness, I hadbelieved it was somehow connected with the ability to read and write, and Iwas sure that if I could get those skills I would have intelligence too.Even a feeble-minded man wants to be like other men.A child may not know how to feed itself, or what to eat, yet it knowshunger.
This day was good for me. I've got to stop this childish worrying aboutmyself-my past and my future. Let me give something of myself to others. I'vegot to use my knowledge and skills to work in the field of increasing humanintelligence. Who is better equipped? Who else has lived in both worlds?Tomorrow, I'm going to get in touch with the board of directors at theWelberg Foundation and ask for permission to do some independent work on theproject. If they'll let me, I may be able to help them. I have some ideas.There is so much that can be done with this technique, if it is perfected. IfI could be made into a genius, what about the more than five millionmentally retarded in the United States? What about the countless millions allover the world, and those yet unborn destined to be retarded? What fantasticlevels might be achieved by using this technique on normal people. Ongeniuses?
There are so many doors to open I am impatient to apply my own knowledge andskills to the problem. I've got to make them all see that this is somethingimportant for me to do. I'm sure the Foundation will grant me permission.But I can't be alone any more. I have to tell Alice about it.June 25 - I called Alice today. I was nervous, and I musthave sounded incoherent, but it was good to hear hervoice, and she sounded happy to hear from me. Sheagreed to see me, and I took a taxi uptown, impatient atthe slowness with which we moved.
Before I could knock, she opened the door and threw her arms around me."Charlie, we've been so worried about you. I had horrible visions of you deadin an alleyway, or wandering around skid row with amnesia. Why didn't you letus know you were all right? You could have done that.""Don't scold me. I had to be alone for a while to find some answers.""Come in the kitchen. I'll make some coffee. What have you been doing?""Days-I've been thinking, reading, and writing; and nights-wandering insearch of myself. And I've discovered that Charlie is watching me.""Don't talk like that," she shuddered. "This business about being watchedisn't real. You've built it up in your mind."
"I can't help feeling that I'm not me. I've usurped his place and locked himout the way they locked me out of the bakery. What I mean to say is thatCharlie Gordon exists in the past, and the past is real. You can't put up anew building on a site until you destroy the old one, and the old Charliecan't be destroyed. He exists. At first I was searching for him: I went tosee his-my-father. All I wanted to do was prove that Charlie existed as aperson in the past, so that I could justify my own existence. I was insultedwhen Nemur said he created me. But I've discovered that not only did Charlieexist in the past, he exists now. In me and around me. He's been comingbetween us all along. I thought my intelligence created the barrier-mypompous, foolish pride, the feeling we had nothing in common because I hadgone beyond you.
You put that idea into my head. But that's not it. It's Charlie, the littleboy who's afraid of women because of things his mother did to him. Don't yousee? All these months while I've been growing up intellectually, I've stillhad the emotional wiring of the childlike Charlie. And every time I cameclose to you, or thought about making love to you, there was a shortcircuit."
I was excited, and my voice pounded at her until she began to quiver. Herface became flushed. "Charlie," she whispered, "can't I do anything? Can't Ihelp?"
"I think I've changed during these weeks away from the lab," I said. "Icouldn't see how to do it at first, but tonight, while I was wandering aroundthe city, it came to me. The foolish thing was trying to solve the problemall by myself. But the deeper I get tangled up in this mass of dreams andmemories the more I realize that emotional problems can't be solved asintellectual problems are. That's what I discovered about myself last night. Itold myself I was wandering around like a lost soul, and then I saw that Iwas lost.
"Somehow I've become separated emotionally fromeveryone and everything. And what I was really searchingfor out there in the dark streets-the last damned place Icould ever find it was a way to make myself a part ofpeople again emotionally, while still retaining my freedomintellectually. I've got to grow up. For me it means everything..."I talked on and on, spewing out of myself every doubt and fear that bubbledto the surface. She was my sounding board and she sat there hypnotized. Ifelt myself grow warm, feverish, until I thought my body was on fire. I wasburning out the infection in front of someone I cared about, and that madeall the difference.
But it was too much for her. What had started as trembling became tears. Thepicture over the couch caught my eye-the cringing, red-cheeked maiden-and Iwondered what Alice was feeling just then. I knew she would give herself tome, and I wanted her, but what about Charlie?
Charlie might not interfere if I wanted to make love to Fay. He wouldprobably just stand in the doorway and watch. But the moment I came close toAlice, he panicked. Why was he afraid to let me love Alice?She sat on the couch, looking at me, waiting to see what I would do. Andwhat could I do? I wanted to take her in my arms and...As I began to think of it, the warning came.
"Are you all right, Charlie? You're so pale."I sat down on the couch beside her. "Just a little dizzy. It'll pass." ButI knew it would only get worse as long as Charlie felt there was danger I'dmake love to her.
And then I got the idea. It disgusted me at first, but suddenly I realizedthe only way to overcome this paralysis was to outwit him. If for some reasonCharlie was afraid of Alice but not of Fay, then I would turn out the lights,and pretend I was making love to Fay. He would never know the difference.It was wrong-disgusting-but if it worked it would break Charlie's stranglehold on my emotions. I would know afterwards that I had loved Alice, and thatthis was the only way.
"I'm all right now. Let's sit in the dark for a while," I said, turning offthe lights and waiting to collect myself. It wasn't going to be easy. I hadto convince myself, visualize Fay, hypnotize myself into believing that thewoman sitting beside me was Fay. And even if he separated himself from me towatch from outside my body, it would do him no good because the room would bedark.
I waited for some sign that he suspected-the warning symptoms of panic. Butnothing. I felt alert and calm. I put my arm around her."Charlie, I-"
"Don't talk!" I snapped, and she shrank from me. "Please," I reassured her, "don'tsay anything. Just let me hold you quietly in the dark."I brought her close to me, and there under the darkness of my closed lids, Iconjured up the picture of Fay-with her long blonde hair and fair skin. Fay, asI had seen her last beside me. I kissed Fay's hair, Fay's throat, and finally cameto rest upon Fay's lips. I felt Fay's arms stroking the muscles on my back,my shoulders, and the tightness inside me built up as it had never beforedone for a woman. I caressed her slowly at first and then with impatient,mounting excitement that would soon tell.
The hairs on my neck began to tingle. Someone else was in the room, peeringthrough the darkness, trying to see. And feverishly I thought the name over andover to myself. Fay! Fay! Fay! I imagined her face sharply and clearly so thatnothing could come between us. And then, as she gripped me closer, I cried outand pushed her away.
"Charlie!" I couldn't see Alice's face, but her gasp mirrored the shock."No, Alice! I can't. You don't understand."I jumped up from the couch and turned on the light. I almost expected to seehim standing there. But of course not. We were alone. It was all in my mind. Alicewas lying there, her blouse open where I had unbuttoned it, her faceflushed, eyes wide in disbelief. "I love you... " the words choked out ofme, "but I can't do it. Something I can't explain, but if I hadn't stopped, I wouldhate myself for the rest of my life. Don't ask me to explain, oryou'll hate me too. It has to do with Charlie. For some reason, he won't letme make love to you."
She looked away and buttoned her blouse. "It was different tonight," shesaid. "You didn't get nausea or panic or anything like that. You wanted me""Yes, I wanted you, but I wasn't really making love to you. I was going touse you-in a way-but I can't explain. I don't understand it myself. Let'sjust say I'm not ready yet. And I can't fake it or cheat or pretend it's allright when it's not. It's just another blind alley."I got up to go.
"Charlie, don't run away again.""I'm through running. I've got work to do. Tell them I'll be back to the labin a few days-as soon as I get control of myself."I left the apartment in a frenzy. Downstairs, in front of the building, Istood, not knowing which way to go. No matter which path I took I got a shockthat meant another mistake. Every path was blocked. But, God ..everything I did, everywhere I turned, doors were closed to me.There was no place to enter. No street, no room, no woman.
Finally, I stumbled down into the subway and took it down to Forty-ninthStreet. Not many people, but there was a blonde with long hair who remindedme of Fay. Heading toward the crosstown bus, I passed a liquor store, andwithout thinking about it, I went in and bought a fifth of gin.While I waited for the bus, I opened the bottle in the bag as I had seen bumsdo, and I took a long, deep drink. It burned all the way down, but it feltgood. I took another-just a sip-and by the time the bus came, I was bathed ina powerful tingling sensation. I didn't take any more. I didn't want to getdrunk now.
When I got to the apartment, I knocked at Fay's door. There was no answer. Iopened the door and looked in. She hadn't come in yet, but all the lightswere on in the place. She didn't give a damn about anything. Why couldn't Ibe that way?
I went to my own place to wait. I undressed, took a shower and put on arobe. I prayed that this wouldn't be one of the nights that someone came homewith her.
About two thirty in the morning I heard her coming up the steps. I took mybottle, climbed out onto the fire escape and slipped over to her window justas her front door opened. I hadn't intended to crouch there and watch. I wasgoing to tap on the window. But as I raised my hand to make my presenceknown, I saw her kick her shoes off and twirl around happily. She went to themirror, and slowly, piece by piece, began to pull off her clothes in aprivate strip tease. I took another drink. But I couldn't let her know I hadbeen watching her.
I went through my own apartment without turning on the lights. At first Ithought of inviting her over to my place, but everything was too neat andorderly-too many straight lines to erase-and I knew it wouldn't work here. SoI went out into the hallway. I knocked at her door, softly at first and thenlouder.
"Door's open!" she shouted.She was in her underwear, lying on the floor, arms outstretched and legs upagainst the couch. She tilted her head back and looked at me upside down."Charlie, darling! Why are you standing on your head?""Never mind," I said, pulling the bottle out of the paper bag."The lines and boxes are too straight, and I thought you'd join me inerasing some of them."
"Best stuff in the world for that," she said. "If you concentrate on thewarm spot that starts in the pit of your stomach, all the lines begin tomelt.""That's what's happening.""Wonderful!" She jumped to her feet. "Me too. I danced with too many squarestonight. Let's melt 'em all down." She picked up a glass and I filled it forher.
As she drank, I slipped my arm around her and toyed with the skin of herbare back.
"Hey, there, boy! Whoa! What's up?""Me. I was waiting for you to come home."She backed away. "Oh, wait a minute, Charlie boy. We've been through allthis before. You know it doesn't do any good. I mean, you know I think a lotof you, and I'd drag you into bed in a minute if I thought there was achance. But I don't want to get all worked up for nothing. It's notfair, Charlie."
"It'll be different tonight. I swear it." Before she could protest, I hadher in my arms, kissing her, caressing her, overwhelming her with all thebuilt-up excitement that was ready to tear me apart. I tried to unhook herbrassiere, but I pulled too hard and the hook tore out."For God's sake, Charlie, my bra-"
"Don't worry about your bra... " I choked, helping her to take it off."I'll buy you a new one. I'm going to make up for the other times. I'm goingto make love to you all night long."
She pulled away from me. "Charlie, I've never heard you talk like that. Andstop looking at me as if you want to swallow me whole." She swept up a blousefrom one of the chairs, and held it in front of her. "Now you're making mefeel undressed."
"I want to make love to you. Tonight I can do it. I know it... I feel it. Don'tturn me away, Fay.""Here," she whispered, "have another drink."I took one and poured another for her, and while she drank it, I covered hershoulder and neck with lasses. She began to breathe heavily as my excitementcommunicated itself to her.
"God, Charlie, if you get me started and disappoint me again I don't knowwhat I'll do. I'm human too, you know."I pulled her down beside me on the couch, on top of the pile of her clothingand underthings.
"Not here on the couch, Charlie," she said, struggling to her feet. "Let'sgo to bed."
"Here," I insisted, pulling the blouse away from her.She looked down at me, set her glass on the floor, and stepped out of herunderwear. She stood there in front of me, nude. "I'll turn out the lights,"she whispered.
"No," I said, pulling her down onto the couch again. "I want to look atyou."
She kissed me deeply and held me tightly in her arms. "Just don't disappointme this time, Charlie. You'd better not."Her body moved slowly, reaching for me, and I knew that this time nothingwould interfere. I knew what to do and how to do it. She gasped and sighedand called my name.
For one moment I had the cold feeling he was watching. Over the arm of thecouch, I caught a glimpse of his face staring back at me through the darkbeyond the window-where just a few minutes earlier. I had been crouching. Aswitch in perception, and I was out on the fire escape again, watching a manand a woman inside, making love on the couch.Then, with a violent effort of the will, I was back on the couch with her,aware of her body and my own urgency and potency, and I saw the face againstthe window, hungrily watching. And I thought to myself, go ahead, you poorbastard-watch. I don't give a damn any more.And his eyes went wide as he watched.
June 29 - Before I go back to the lab I'm going to finishthe projects I've started since I left the convention. Iphoned Landsdoff at the New Institute for AdvancedStudy, about the possibility of utilizing the pairproduction nuclearphotoeffect for exploratory work inbiophysics. At first he thought I was a crackpot, but afterI pointed out the flaws in his article in the New InstituteJournal he kept me on the phone for nearly an hour. Hewants me to come to the Institute to discuss my ideaswith his group. I might take him up on it after I've finished my work at thelab-if there is time. That's theproblem, of course. I don't know how much time I have. A month? A year? The restof my life? That depends on what I find out about the psychophysical side-effectsof the experiment.
June 30 - I've stopped wandering the streets now that I have Fay. I've given hera key to my place. She kids me about my locking the door, and I kid her about themess her place is in. She's warned me not to try to change her. Her husband divorcedher five years ago because she couldn't be bothered about picking things up and takingcare of her home.
That's the way she is about most things that seem unimportant to her. Shejust can't or won't bother. The other day I discovered a stack of parkingtickets in a corner behind a chair-there must have been forty or fifty ofthem. When she came in with the beer, I asked her why she was collectingthem."Those!" she laughed. "As soon as my ex-husband sends me my goddamned check,I'vegot to pay some of them. You have no idea how bad I feel about thosetickets. I keep them behind that chair because otherwise I get an attack ofguilt feelings every time I see them. But what is a girl supposed to do?Everywhere I go they've got signs all over the place-don't park here! don'tpark there!-I just can't be bothered stopping to read a sign every time Iwant to get out of the car."
So I've promised I won't try to change her. She's exciting to be with. Agreat sense of humor. But most of all she's a free and independent spirit. Theonly thing that may become wearing after a while is her craze for dancing. We'vebeen out every night this week until two or three in the morning. I don't havethat much energy left.
It's not love-but she's important to me. I find myself listening for herfootsteps down the hallway whenever she's been out.Charlie has stopped watching us.
July 5 - I dedicated my first piano concerto to Fay. She was excited by theidea of having something dedicated to her, but I don't think she really likedit. Just goes to show that you can't have everything you want in one woman.One more argument for polygamy.
The important thing is that Fay is bright and goodhearted. I learned todaywhy she ran out of money soearly this month. The week before she met me, she hadbefriended a girl she'd met at the Stardust Ballroom. When the girl told Fay shehad no family in the city, was broke, and had no place to sleep, Fay invited herto move in. Two days later the girl found the two hundred and thirty-two dollarsthat is kept in her dresser drawer, and disappeared with the money. Fay hadn'treported it to the police-and as it turned out, she didn't even know the girl'slast name.
"What good would it do to notify the police?" shewanted to know. "I mean this poor bitch must haveneeded the money pretty badly to do it. I'm not going toruin her life over a few hundred bucks. I'm not rich oranything, but I'm not going after her skin if you knowwhat I mean."
I knew what she meant.I have never met anyone as open and trusting as Fay is. She's what I needmost of all right now. I've been starved for simple human contact.July 8 - Not much time for work-between the nightly club-hopping and themorning hangovers. It was only with aspirin and something Fay concocted forme that I was able to finish my linguistic analysis of Urdu verb forms andsend the paper to the International Linguistics Bulletin. It will send thelinguists back to India with their tape recorders, because it undermines thecritical superstructure of their methodology.
I can't help but admire the structural linguists who have carved out forthemselves a linguistic discipline based on the deterioration of writtencommunication. Another case of men devoting their lives to studying more andmore about less and less-filling volumes and libraries with the subtlelinguistic analysis of the grunt. Nothing wrong with that, but it should notbe used as an excuse to destroy the stability of language.Alice called today to find out when I am coming back to work at the lab. Itold her I wanted to finish the projects I had started, and that I was hopingto get permission from the Welberg Foundation for my own special study. She'sright though-I've got to take time into consideration.
Fay still wants to go out dancing all the time. Lastnight started out with us drinking and dancing at theWhite Horse Club, and from there to Benny's Hideaway,and then on to the Pink Slipper... and after that I don't remember many of theplaces, but we danced until I was ready to drop.
My tolerance for liquor must have increased because I was pretty far gonebefore Charlie made his appearance. I can only recall him doing a silly tapdance on the stage of the Allakazam Club. He got a great hand before themanager threw us out, and Fay said everyone thought I was a wonderfulcomedian and everyone liked my moron act.
What the hell happened then? I know I strained my back. I thought it wasfrom all the dancing, but Fay says I fell off the goddamned couch.Algernon's behavior is becoming erratic again. Minnie seems to be afraid ofhim.July 9 - A terrible thing happened today. Algernon bit Fay. I had warned heragainst playing with him, but she always liked to feed him. Usually when shecame into his room, he'd perk up and run to her. Today it was different. Hewas at the far side, curled up into a white puff. When she put her hand inthrough the top trap door, he cringed and forced himself back into thecorner. She tried to coax him, by opening the barrier to the maze, and beforeI could tell her to leave him alone, she made the mistake of trying to pickhim up. He bit her thumb. Then he glared at both of us and scurried back intothe maze.
We found Minnie at the other end in the reward box. She was bleeding from agash in her chest, but she was alive. As I reached in to take her outAlgernon came into the reward box and snapped at me. His teeth caught mysleeve and he hung on until I shook him loose.He calmed down after that. I observed him for more than an hour afterward. Heseems listless and confused, and though he still learns new problemswithout external rewards, his performance is peculiar. Instead of the careful,determined movements down the maze corridors, his actions are rushed andout of control. Time and again he turns into a corner too quickly and crashesinto a barrier. There is a strange sense of urgency in his behavior.I hesitate to make a snap judgment. It could be many things. But now I'vegot to get him back to the lab. Whether or not I hear from the Foundationabout my special grant, I'm going to call Nemur in the morning.

%%%%%PROGRESS REPORT 15July 12 - Nemur, Strauss, Burt, and a few of the others on the project were waitingfor me in the psych office. They tried to make me feel welcome but I could see howanxious Burt was to take Algernon, and I turned him over. No one said anything, butI knew that Nemur would not soon forgive me for going over his head and getting intouch with the Foundation. But it had been necessary. Before I returned toBeekman, I had to be assured they would permit me to begin an independent study ofthe project. Too much time would be wasted if I had to account to Nemur for everythingI did.
He had been informed of the Foundation's decision, and my reception was acold and formal one. He held out his hand, but there was no smile on hisface. "Charlie," be said, "we're all glad you're back and going to work withus. Jayson called and told me the Foundation was putting you to work on theproject. This staff and the lab are at your disposal. The computer center hasassured us that your work will have priority-and of course if I can help inanyway .."
He was doing his utmost to be cordial, but I could see by his face that hewas skeptical. After all, what experience did I have with experimentalpsychology? What did I know about the techniques that he had spent so manyyears developing? Well, as I say, he appeared cordial, and willing to suspendjudgment. There isn't much else he can do now. If I don't come up with anexplanation for Algernon's behavior, all of his work goes down the drain, butif I solve the problem I bring in the whole crew with me.I went into the lab where Burt was watching Algernon in one of the multipleproblem boxes. He sighed and shook his head. "He's forgotten a lot. Most ofhis complex responses seem to have been wiped out. He's solving problems ona much more primitive level than I would have expected.""In what way?" I asked.
"Well, in the past he was able to figure out simple patterns-in thatblind-door run, for example: every other door, every third door, red doorsonly, or the green doors only, but now he's been through that run three timesand he's still using trial and error.""Could it be because he was away from the lab for so long?""Could be. We'll let him get used to things again and see how he works outtomorrow."
I had been in the lab many times before this, but now I was here to learneverything it had to offer. I had to absorb procedures in a few days that theothers had taken years to learn. Burt and I spent four hours going throughthe lab section by section, as I tried to familiarize myself with the totalpicture. When we were all through I noticed one door we had not looked into."What's in there?"
"The freeze and the incinerator." He pushed open the heavy door and turnedon the light. "We freeze our specimens before we dispose of them in theincinerator. It helps cut down the odors if we control decomposition." Heturned to leave, but I stood there for a moment."Not Algernon," I said. "Look... if and... when... I mean I don'twant him dumped in there. Give him to me. I'll take care of him myself." Hedidn't laugh. He just nodded. Nemur had told him that from now on I couldhave anything I wanted.
Time was the barrier. If I was going to find out the answers for myself Ihad to get to work immediately. I got lists of books from Burt, and notesfrom Strauss and Nemur. Then, on the way out, I got a strange notion."Tell me," I asked Nemur, "I just got a look at your incinerator fordisposing of experimental animals. What plans have been made for me?"My question stunned him. "What do you mean?""I'm sure that from the beginning you planned for all exigencies. So whathappens to me?"
When he was silent I insisted: "I have a right to know everything thatpertains to the experiment, and that includes my future.""No reason why you shouldn't know." He paused and lit an already lit cigarette."You understand, of course, that from the beginning we had the highest hopesof permanence, and we still do... we definitely do-""I'm sure of that," I said.
"Of course, taking you on in this experiment was a serious responsibility. I don'tknow how much you remember or how much you've pieced together about things in thebeginning of the project, but we tried to make it clear to you that there was astrong chance it might be only temporary""I had that written down in my progress reports, at the time," I agreed, "though Ididn't understand at the time what you meant by it. But that's beside the pointbecause I'm aware of it now."
"Well, we decided to risk it with you," he went on, "because we felt therewas very little chance of doing you any serious harm, and we were sure therewas a great chance of doing you some good.""You don't have to justify that."
"But you realize we had to get permission from someone in your immediatefamily. You were incompetent to agree to this yourself.""I know all about that. You're talking about my sister, Norma. I read aboutit in the papers. From what I remember of her, I imagine she'd have given youapproval for my execution."
He raised his eyebrows, but let it pass. "Well, as we told her, in the eventthat the experiment failed, we couldn't send you back to the bakery or tothat room where you came from."
"Why not?""For one thing, you might not be the same. Surgery and injections ofhormones might have had effects not immediately evident. Experiences sincethe operation might have left their mark on you. I mean, possibly emotionaldisturbances to complicate the retardation; you couldn't possibly be the samekind of person-"
"That's great. As if one cross weren't enough to bear.""And for another thing there's no way of knowing if you would go back to thesame mental level. There might be regression to an even more primitive levelof functioning."
was letting me have the worst of it getting the weight off his mind. "I might aswell know everything," I said, "while I'm still in a position to have some sayabout it. What plans have you made for me?"He shrugged. "The Foundation has arranged to send you to the Warren StateHome and Training School.""What the hell!"
"Part of the agreement with your sister was that all the home's fees wouldbe assumed by the Foundation, and you would receive a regular monthly incometo be used for your personal needs for the rest of your life.""But why there? I was always able to manage on my own on the outside, evenwhen they committed me there, after Uncle Herman died. Donner was able to getme out right away, to work and live on the outside. Why do I have to goback?"
"If you can take care of yourself on the outside, youwon't have to stay in Warren. The less severe cases arepermitted to live off the grounds. But we had to makeprovision for you just in case."
He was right. There was nothing for me to complain about. They had thoughtof everything. Warren was the logical place-the deep freeze where I could beput away for the rest of my days.
"At least it's not the incinerator," I said."What?""Never mind. A private joke." Then I thought of something."Tell me, is it possible to visit Warren, I mean go through the place andlook it over as a visitor?""Yes, I think they have people coming down all the time-regular toursthrough the home as a kind of public relations thing. But why?""Because I want to see. I've got to know what's goingto happen while I'm still enough in control to be able todo something about it. See if you can arrange it as soonas possible."
I could see he was upset about the idea of my visiting Warren. As if I wereordering my coffin to sit in before I died. But then, I can't blame himbecause he doesn't realize that finding out who I really am-the meaning of mytotal existence involves knowing the possibilities of my future as well as mypast, where I'm going as well as where I've been. Although we know the end ofthe maze holds death (and it is something I have not always known -- not longago the adolescent in me thought death could happen only to other people),I see now that the path I choose through that maze makes me what Iam. I am not only a thing, but also a way of being-one of many ways-andknowing the paths I have followed and the ones left to take will help meunderstand what I am becoming.
That evening and for the next few days I immersed myself in psychologytexts: clinical, personality, psychometrics, learning, experimentalpsychology, animal psychology, physiological psychology, behaviorist,gestalt, analytical, functional, dynamic, organismic, and all the rest of theancient and modern factions, schools, and systems of thought. The depressingthing is that so many of the ideas on which our psychologists base theirbeliefs about human intelligence, memory, and learning are all wishfulthinking.
Fay wants to come down and visit the lab, but I've told her not to. All Ineed now is for Alice and Fay to run into each other. I've enough to worryabout without that.

%%%%%PROGRESS REPORT 16July 14 - It was a bad day to go out to Warren-grayand drizzly-and that may account for the depressionthat grips me when I think about it. Or perhaps I'm kidding myself and it wasthe idea of possibly being sentthere that bothered me. I borrowed Burt's car. Alicewanted to come along, but I had to see it alone. I didn'ttell Fay I was going.
It was an hour-and-a-half drive out to the farmland community of Warren, LongIsland, and I had no trouble finding the place: a sprawling gray estaterevealed to the world only by an entrance of two concrete pillars flanking anarrow side-road and a well-polished brass plate with the name Warren StateHome and Training School.
The roadside sign said 15 nsrx, so I drove slowly past the blocks ofbuildings looking for the administrative offices.A tractor came across the meadow and in addition to the man at the wheel therewere two others hanging on the rear. I stuck out my head and called:"Can you tell me where Mr Winslow's office is?"The driver stopped the tractor and pointed to the left and ahead. "MainHospital. Turn left and bear to your right."
I couldn't help noticing the staring young man riding at the rear of thetractor, hanging on to a handrail. He was unshaven, and there was the traceof an empty smile. He had on a sailor's hat with the brim pulled downchildishly to shield his eyes, although there was no sun out. I caught hisglance for a moment-his eyes wide, inquiring-but I had to look away. When thetractor started forward again, I could see in the rear view mirror that hewas looking after me, curiously. It upset me... because he reminded me ofCharlie.
I was startled to find the head psychologist so young, a tall, lean man witha tired look on his face. But his steady blue eyes suggested a strengthbehind the youthful expression.He drove me around the grounds in his own car, and pointed out therecreation hall, hospital, school, administrative offices, and the two-storybrick buildings he called cottages where the patients lived."I didn't notice a fence around Warren," I said."No, only a gate at the entrance and hedges to keep out curiosity seekers.""But how do you keep... them... from wandering off... from leavingthe grounds?"
He shrugged and smiled. "We can't, really. Some of them do wander off, butmost of them return.""Don't you go after them?"He looked at me as if trying to guess what was behind my question. "No. Ifthey get into trouble, we soon know about it from the people in town-or thepolice bring them back."
"And if not?""If we don't hear about them, or from them, we assume they've made somesatisfactory adjustment on the outside. You've got to understand, Mr Gordon,this isn't a prison. We are required by the state to make all reasonableefforts to get our patients back, but we're not equipped to closely supervisefour thousand people at all times. The ones who manage to leave are allhigh-moron types - not that we're getting many of those any more. Now weget more of the brain-damaged cases who require constant custodial care - butthe high-morons can move around more freely, and after a week or so on theoutside most of them come back when they find there's nothing for them outthere. The world doesn't want them and they soon know it."We got out of the car and walked over to one of the cottages. Inside, thewalls were white tile, and the building had a disinfectant smell to it. Thefirst-floor lobby opened up to a recreation room filled with someseventy-five boys sitting around waiting for the lunch bell to be sounded.What caught my eye immediately was one of the bigger boys on a chair in thecorner, cradling one of the other boys-fourteen or fifteen years old cuddlinghim in his arms. They all turned to look as we entered, and some of thebolder ones came over and stared at me.
"Don't mind them," he said, seeing my expression. "They won't hurt you"The woman in charge of the floor, a large-boned, handsome woman, with rolledup shirt sleeves and a denim apron over her starched white skirt, came up tous. At her belt was a ring of keys that jangled as she moved, and only whenshe turned did I see that the left side of her face was covered by a large,wine-colored birthmark.
"Didn't expect any company today, Ray," she said. "You usually bring yourvisitors on Thursdays."`This is Mr Gordon, Thelma, from Beekman University. He just wants to lookaround and get an idea of the work we're doing here. I knew it wouldn't makeany difference with you, Thelma. Any day is all right with you.""Yeah," she laughed strongly, "but Wednesday we turn the mattresses. Itsmells a lot better here on Thursday."I noticed that she kept to my left so that the blotch on her face washidden. She took me through the dormitory, the laundry, the supply rooms, andthe dining hall-now set and waiting for the food to be delivered from thecentral commissary. She smiled as she talked, and her expression and the hairpiled in a bun high on her head made her look like a Lautrec dancer but she neverlooked straight at me. I wondered what it would be like living here with her towatch over me.
"They're pretty good here in this building," she said. "But you know what itis. Three hundred boys -- seventyfive on a floor-and only five of us to lookafter them. It's not easy to keep them under control. But it's a lot betterthan the untidy cottages. The staff there doesn't last very long. With babiesyou don't mind so much, but when they get to be adults and still can't carefor themselves, it can be a nasty moss""You seem to be a very nice person," I said. "The boys are fortunate to haveyou as their house-supervisor."
She laughed heartily still looking straight ahead, and showed her whiteteeth. "No better or worse than the rest. I'm very fond of my boys. It's noteasy work, but it's rewarding when you think how much they need you." Thesmile left her for a moment. "Normal kids grow up too soon, stop needing you...go off on their own... forget who loved them and took care of them. Butthese children need all you can give-all of their lives." She laughedagain, embarrassed at her seriousness. "It's hard work here, but worth it."Back downstairs, where Winslow was waiting for us, the dinner bell sounded,and the boys filed into the dining room. I noticed that the big boy who hadheld the smaller one in his lap was now leading him to the table by the hand."Quite a thing," I said, nodding in that direction.
Winslow nodded too. "Jerry's the big one, and that's Dusty. We see that sortof thing often here. When there's no one else who has time for them,sometimes they know enough to seek human contact and affection from eachother."
As we passed one of the other cottages on our way to the school, I heard ashriek followed by a wailing, picked up and echoed by two or three othervoices. There were bars on the windows.Winslow looked uncomfortable for the first time that morning. "Specialsecurity cottage," he explained. "Emotionally disturbed retardates. Whenthere's a chance they'll barm themselves or others, we put them in CottageK. Locked up at all times."
"Emotionally disturbed patients here? Don't they belong in psychiatrichospitals?""Oh, sure," he said, "but it's a difficult thing to control. Some, theborderline emotionally disturbed, don't break down until after they've beenhere for a while. Others were committed by the courts, and we had no choicebut to admit them even though there's really no room for them. The realproblem is that there's no room for anyone anywhere. Do you know how long ourown waiting list is? Fourteen hundred. And we may have room for twenty-fiveor thirty of them by the end of the year."
"Where are those fourteen hundred now?""Home. On the outside, waiting for an opening here or in some otherinstitution. You see, our space problem is not like the usual hospitalovercrowding. Our patients usually come here to stay for the rest of theirlives."
As we arrived at the new school building, a one-story glass-and-concretestructure with large picture windows, I tried to imagine what it would belike walking through these corridors as a patient. I visualized myself in themiddle of a line of men and boys waiting to enter a classroom. Perhaps I'd beone of those pushing another boy in a wheelchair, or guiding someone else bythe hand, or cuddling a smaller boy in my arms.
In one of the woodworking classrooms, where a group of older boys weremaking benches under a teacher's supervision, they clustered around us,eyeing me curiously. The teacher put down the saw and came towards us."This is Mr Gordon from Beekman University," said Winslow. "Wants to lookover some of our patients. He's thinking of buying the place."The teacher laughed and waved at his pupils. "Well, if he b-buys it, he'sg-got to t-take us with it. And he's g-got to get us some more w-wood tow-work with."
As he showed me around the shop, I noticed how strangely quiet the boyswere. They went on with their work of sanding or varnishing the newlyfinished benches, but they didn't talk.
"These are my s-silent b-boys, you know," he said, as if he sensed myunspoken question. "D-deaf m-mutes.""We have a hundred and six of them here," explained Winslow, "as a specialstudy sponsored by the federal government."What an incredible thing! How much less they had than other human beings. Mentallyretarded, deaf, mute - and still eagerly sanding benches.One of the boys who had been tightening a block of wood in a vise, stoppedwhat he was doing, tapped Winslow on the arm, and pointed to the corner wherea number of finished objects were drying on display shelves. The boy pointedto a lamp base on the second shelf, and then to himself. It was a poor job,unsteady, the patches of wood-filler showing through, and the varnish heavyand uneven. Winslow and the teacher praised it enthusiastically, and the boysmiled proudly and looked at me, waiting for my praise too."Yes," I nodded, mouthing the words exaggeratedly, "very good... verynice." I said it because he needed it, but I felt hollow. The boy smiled atme, and when we turned to leave he came over and touched my arm as a way ofsaying good-bye. It choked me up, and I had a great deal of difficultycontrolling my emotions until we were out in the corridor again.The principal of the school was a short, plump, motherly lady who sat medown in front of a neatly lettered chart, showing the various types ofpatients, the number of faculty assigned to each category, and the subjectsthey studied.
"Of course," she explained, "we don't get many of the upper IQ's anymore. They're taken care of-the sixty and seventy IQ's-more and more in thecity schools in special classes, or else there are community facilities forcaring for them. Most of the ones we get are able to live out, in fosterhomes, boarding houses, and do simple work on the farms or in a menialcapacity in factories or laundries-""Or bakeries," I suggested.
She frowned. "Yes, I guess they might be able to do that. Now, we alsoclassify our children (I call them all children, no matter what their agesare, they're all children here), we classify them as tidy or untidy. It makesthe administration of their cottages a lot easier if they can be kept withtheir own levels. Some of the untidies are severely brain-damaged cases, keptin cribs, and they will be cared for that way for the rest of their lives...""Or until science finds a way to help them.""Oh," she smiled, explaining to me carefully, "I'm afraid these are beyondhelp."
"No one is beyond help."She peered at me, uncertainly now. "Yes, yes, of course, you're right. Wemust have hope."
I made her nervous. I smiled to myself at the thought of how it would be ifthey brought me back here as one of her children. Would I be tidy or not?Back at Winslows office, we had coffee as he talked about his work. "It's agood place," he said. "We have no psychiatrists on our staff-only an outsideconsulting man who comes in once every two weeks. But it's just as well. Everyone of the psych staff is dedicated to his work. I could have hired a psychiatrist,but at the price I'd have to pay I'm able to hire two psychologists-men who aren'tafraid to give away a part of themselves to these people.""What do you mean by `a part of themselves'?"He studied me for a moment, and then through the tiredness flashed an anger."There are a lot of people who will give money or materials, but very few whowill give time and affection. That's what I mean."
His voice grew harsh, and he pointed to an empty baby bottle on the bookshelfacross the room."You see that bottle?"I told him I had wondered about it when we came into his office."Well, how many people do you know who are prepared to take a grown man intohis arms and let him nurse with the bottle? And take the chance of having thepatient urinate or defecate all over him? You look surprised. You can'tunderstand it, can you, from way up there in your research ivory tower? Whatdo you know about being shut out from every human experience as our patientshave been?"
I couldn't restrain a smile, and he apparently misunderstood, because hestood up and ended the conversation abruptly. If I come back here to stay,and he finds out the whole story, I'm sure he'll understand. He's the kind ofman who would.
As I drove out of Warren, I didn't know what tothink. The feeling of cold grayness was everywhere around me - a sense ofresignation. There had been no talk of rehabilitation, of cure,of someday sending these people out into the world again. No one had spokenof hope. The feeling was of living death-or worse, of never having been fullyalive and knowing. Souls withered from the beginning, and doomed to stareinto the time and space of every day.I wondered about the house-mother with her redblotched face, and thestuttering shop teacher, and the motherly principal, and youthfultired-looking psychologist, and wished I knew how they had found their wayhere to work and dedicate themselves to these silent minds. Like the boy whoheld the younger one in his arms, each had found a fulfillment in giving awaya part of himself to those who had less.
And what about the things I wasn't shown?I may soon be coming to Warren, to spend the rest of my life with the others...waiting.July 15 - I've been putting off a visit to my mother. I want to see her and Idon't. Not until I'm sure what is going to happen to me. Let's see first howthe work goes and what I discover.Algernon refuses to run the maze any more; general motivation has decreased. Istopped off again today to see him, and this time Strauss was there too. Bothhe and Nemur looked disturbed as they watched Burt force-feed him. Strange tosee the little puff of white clamped down on the worktable and Burt forcing thefood down his throat with an eye-dropper.
If it keeps up this way, they'll have to start feeding him by injection. WatchingAlgernon squirm under those tiny bands this afternoon, I felt them around my ownarms and legs. I started to gag and choke, and I had to get out of the lab forfresh air. I've got to stop identifying with him.
I went down to Murray's Bar and had a few drinks. And then I called Fay andwe made the rounds. Fay is annoyed that I've stopped taking her out dancing,and she got angry and walked out on me last night. She has no idea of my workand no interest in it, and when I do try to talk to her about it she makes noattempt to hide her boredom. She just can't be bothered, and I can't blameher. She's interested in only three things that I can see: dancing, painting,and sex. And the only thing we really have in common is sex. It's foolish ofme to try to interest her in my work. So she goes dancing without me. Shetold me that the other night she dreamed she had come into the apartment andset fire to all my books and notes, and that we went off dancing around theflames. I've got to watch out. She's becoming possessive. I just realizedtonight that my own place is starting to resemble her apartment-a mess. I'vegot to cut down on the drinking.
July 16 - Alice met Fay last night. I'd been concerned about what would happenif they came face to face. Alice came to see me after she found out aboutAlgernon from Burt. She knows what it may mean, and she still feelsresponsible for having encouraged me in the first place.We had coffee and we talked late. I knew that Fay had gone out dancing atthe Stardust Ballroom, so I didn't expect her home so early. But at about oneforty-five in the morning we were startled by Fay's sudden appearance on thefire-escape. She tapped, pushed open the half-open window and came waltzinginto the room with a bottle in her hand.
"Crashing the party," she said. "Brought my own refreshments."I had told her about Alice working on the project at the university, and Ihad mentioned Fay to Alice earlier-so they weren't surprised to meet. Butafter a few seconds of sizing each other up, they started talking about artand me, and for all they cared I could have been anywhere else in the world.They liked each other.
"I'll get the coffee," I said, and wandered out to the kitchen to leave themalone.When I came back, Fay had taken off her shoes and was sitting on the floor,sipping gin out of the bottle. She was explaining to Alice that as far as shewas concerned there was nothing more valuable to the human body thansunbathing, and that nudist colonies were the answer to the world's moralproblems.Alice was laughing hysterically at Fay's suggestion that we all join anudist colony, and she leaned over and accepted a drink that Fay poured forher. We sat and talked until dawn, and I insisted on seeing Alice home. When sheprotested that it wasn't necessary, Fay insisted that she would be a fool togo out alone in the city at this hour. So I went down and hailed a cab."There's something about her," said Alice on the way home. "I don't knowwhat it is. Her frankness, her open trust, her unselfishness ..:'I agreed.
"And she loves you," said Alice."No. She loves everyone," I insisted. "I'm just the neighbor across thehall.""Aren't you in love with her?"I shook my head. "You're the only woman I've ever loved.""Let's not talk about that""Then you've cut me off from an important source of conversation.""Only one thing I'm worried about, Charlie. The drinking. I've heard aboutsome of those hangovers.""Tell Burt to confine his observations and reports to the experimentaldata. I won't have him poisoning you against me. I can handle the drinks.""I've heard that one before.""But never from me.""That's the only thing I have against her," she said. "She's got youdrinking and she's interfering with your work.""I can handle that too.""This work is important now, Charlie. Not only to the world and millions ofunknown people, but to you. Charlie, you've got to solve this thing foryourself as well. Don't let anyone tie your hands.""So, now the truth comes out," I teased. "You'd like me to see less of her.""That's not what I said.""It's what you meant. If she's interfering with my work we both know I'vegot to cut her out of my life.""No, I don't think you should cut her out of your life. She's good for you. Youneed a woman who's been around as she has.""You would be good for me."She turned her face away. "Not in the same way she is." She looked back atme. "I came here tonight prepared to hate her. I wanted to see her as a vile,stupid whore you'd gotten mixed up with, and I had big plans about coming betweenyou and saving you from her in spite of yourself. But now that I've met her,I realize I have no right to judge her behavior. I think she's good for you. Sothat really lets the air out of me. I like her even if I disapprove. Butin spite of that, if you've got to drink with her and spend all of your timewith her in night clubs and cabarets dancing, then she's in your way. Andthat's a problem only you can solve.""Another one of those?" I laughed."Are you up to this one? You're deeply involved with her. I can tell.""Not all that deep.""Have you told her about yourself?""No."Imperceptibly, I could see her relax. By keeping the secret about myself, Ihad somehow not committed myself to Fay completely. We both knew that,wonderful as she was, Fay would never understand."I needed her," I said, "and in a way she needed me, and living right acrossfrom each other, well it was just handy, that's all. But I wouldn't call itlove-not the same thing that exists between us."She looked down at her hands and frowned. "I'm not sure I know what doesexist between us.""Something so deep and significant that Charlie inside me is terrifiedwhenever there seems to be any chance of my making love to you.""And not with her?"I shrugged. "That's how I know it's not important with her. It doesn't meanenough for Charlie to panic.""Great!" she laughed. "And ironic as hell. When you talk about him thatway, I hate him for coming between us. Do you think he'll ever letyou... let us ..""I don't know. I hope so."
I left her at the door. We shook hands, and yet, strangely, it was muchcloser and more intimate than an embrace would have been.I went home and made love to Fay, but kept thinking of Alice.July 27 - Working around the clock. Over Fay's protests, I've had a cot movedinto the lab. She's become too possessive and resentful of my work. I think shecould tolerate another woman, but not this complete absorption in something shecan't follow. I was afraid it would come to this, but I have no patience withher now. I'm jealous of every moment away from the work-impatient with anyonewho tries to steal my time.
Though most of my writing time is spent on notes which I keep in a separatefolder, from time to time I have to put down my moods and thoughts out ofsheer habit.The calculus of intelligence is a fascinating study. In a sense this is theproblem I've been concerned with all my life. Here is the place for theapplication of all the knowledge I have acquired.Time assumes another dimension now-work and absorption in the search for ananswer. The world around me and my past seem far away and distorted, as iftime and space were taffy being stretched and looped and twisted out ofshape. The only real things are the cages and the mice and the lab equipmenthere on the fourth floor of the main building.There is no night or day. I've got to cram a lifetime of research into a fewweeks. I know I should rest, but I can't until I know the truth about what ishappening.
Alice is a great help to me now. She brings me sandwiches and coffee, butshe makes no demands.About my perception: everything is sharp and clear, each sensationheightened and illuminated so that reds and yellows and blues glow. Sleepinghere has a strange effect. The odors of the laboratory animals, dogs, monkeys,mice, spin me back into memories, and it is difficult to know whetherI am experiencing a new sensation or recalling the past. It is impossible totell what proportion is memory and what exists here and now-so that a strangecompound is formed of memory and reality; past and present; response tostimuli stored in my brain centers, and response to stimuli in this room.It's as if all the things I've learned have fused into a crystal universespinning before me so that I can see all the facets of it reflected ingorgeous bursts of light... .
A monkey sitting in the center of his cage, staring at me out of sleepyeyes, rubbing his cheeks with little old-man shriveled hands... chee... cheee...cheeeee... and bouncing off the cage wire, up to the swing overhead where theother monkey sits staring dumbly into space. Urinating, defecating, passing wind,staring at me and laughing... cheeee... cheeeee... cheeeee...And bouncing around, leap, hop, up around and down, he swings and tries tograb the other monkey's tail, but the one on the bar keeps swishing it away,without fuss, out of his grasp. Nice monkey... pretty monkey ..with big eyes and swishy tail. Can I feed him a peanut?... No, the man'llholler. That sign says do not feed the animals. That's a chimpanzee. Can Ipet him? No. I want to pet the chip-a-zee. Never mind, come and look at theelephants.
Outside, crowds of bright sunshiny people are dressed in spring.Algernon lies in his own dirt, unmoving, and the odors are stronger thanever before. And what about me?July 28-Fay has a new boy friend. I went home last night to be with her. Iwent to my room first to get a bottle and then headed over on the fireescape. But fortunately I looked before going in. They were together on thecouch. Strange, I don't really care. It's almost a relief.I went back to the lab to work with Algernon. He has moments out of hislethargy. Periodically, he will run a shifting maze, but when he fails andfinds himself in a dead-end, he reacts violently. When I got down to thelab, I looked in. He was alert and came up to me as if he knew me. He waseager to work, and when I set him down through the trap door in the wiremesh of the maze, he moved swiftly along the pathways to the rewardbox. Twice he ran the maze successfully. The third time, he got halfwaythrough, paused at an intersection, and then with a twitching movement tookthe wrong turn. I could see what was going to happen, and I wanted to reachdown and take him out before he ended up in a blind alley. But I restrainedmyself and watched.
When he found himself moving along the unfamiliar path, he slowed down, andhis actions became erratic: start, pause, double back, turn around and thenforward again, until finally he was in the cul-de-sac that informed him with amild shock that he had made a mistake. At this point, instead ofturning back to find an alternate route, he began to move in circles,squeaking like a phonograph needle scratched across the grooves. He threwhimself against the walls of the maze, again and again, leaping up, twistingover backwards and falling, and throwing himself again. Twice he caught hisclaws in the overhead wire mesh, screeching wildly, letting go, and tryinghopelessly again. Then he stopped and curled himself up into a small, tightball.When I picked him up, he made no attempt to uncurl, but remained in thatstate much like a catatonic stupor. When I moved his head or limbs, theystayed like wax. I put him back into his cage and watched him until thestupor wore off and he began to move around normally.What eludes me is the reason for his regression-is it a special case? Anisolated reaction? Or is there some general principle of failure basic to thewhole procedure? I've got to work out the rule.If I can find that out, and if it adds even one jot of information towhatever else has been discovered about mental retardation and thepossibility of helping others like myself, I will be satisfied. Whateverhappens to me, I will have lived a thousand normal lives by what I might addto others not yet born.
That's enough.July 31 - I'm on the edge of it. I sense it. They all think I'm killing myselfat this pace, but what they don't understand is that I'm living at a peak ofclarity and beauty I never knew existed. Every part of me is attuned to thework. I soak it up into my pores during the day, and at night-in the momentsbefore I pass off into sleep-ideas explode into my head like fireworks. Thereis no greater joy than the burst of solution to a problem.Incredible that anything could happen to take away this bubbling energy, thezest that fills everything I do. It's as if all the knowledge I've soaked induring the past months has coalesced and lifted me to a peak of light andunderstanding. This is beauty, love, and truth all rolled into one. This isjoy. And now that I've found it, how can I give it up? Life and work are themost wonderful things a man can have. I am in love with what I am doing, becausethe answer to this problem is right here in my mind, and soon-verysoon-it will burst into consciousness. Let me solve this one problem. I prayGod it is the answer I want, but if not I will accept any answer at all andtry to be grateful for what I had.
Fay's new boy friend is a dance instructor from the Stardust Ballroom. Ican't really blame her since I have so little time to be with her.August 11 - Blind alley for the past two days. Nothing. I've taken a wrong turnsomewhere, because I get answers to a lot of questions, but not to the mostimportant question of all: How does Algernon's regression affect the basichypothesis of the experiment?
Fortunately, I know enough about the processes of the mind not to let thisblock worry me too much. Instead of panicking and giving up (or what's evenworse, pushing hard for answers that won't come) I've got to take my mind offthe problem for a while and let it stew. I've gone as far as I can on aconscious level, and now it's up to those mysterious operations below thelevel of awareness. It's one of those inexplicable things, how everythingI've learned and experienced is brought to bear on the problem. Pushing toohard will only make things freeze up. How many great problems have goneunsolved because men didn't know enough, or have enough faith in the creativeprocess and in themselves, to let go for the whole mind to work at it?So I decided yesterday afternoon to put the work aside for a while and go toMrs Nemur's cocktail party. It was in honor of the two men on the board ofthe Welberg Foundation who had been instrumental in getting her husband thegrant. I planned to take Fay, but she said she had a date and she'd rather godancing.
I started out the evening with every intention of being pleasant and makingfriends. But these days I have trouble getting through to people. I don'tknow if it's me or them, but any attempt at conversation usually fades awayin a minute or two, and the barriers go up. Is it because they are afraid ofme? Or is it that deep down they don't care and feel the same about them?I took a drink and wandered around the big room.There were little knots of people sitting in conversation groups, the kindI find it impossible to join. Finally, Mrs Nemur corneredme and introduced me to Hyram Harvey, one of the board members. Mrs Nemur isan attractive woman, early forties, blonde hair, lots of make-up and long rednails. She had her arm through Harvey's. "How is the research coming?" Shewanted to know."As well as can be expected. I'm trying to solve a tough problem right now."She lit a cigarette and smiled at me. "I know that everyone on the projectis grateful that you've decided to pitch in and help out. But I imagine you'dmuch rather be working on something of your own. It must be rather dulltaking up someone else's work rather than something you've conceived andcreated yourself."
She was sharp, all right. She didn't want Hyram Harvey to forget that herhusband had the credit coming. I couldn't resist tossing it back at her. "Noone really starts anything new, Mrs Nemur. Everyone builds on other men'sfailures. There is nothing really original in science. What each mancontributes to the sum of knowledge is what counts.""Of course," she said, talking to her elderly guest rather than to me. "It'sa shame Mr Gordon wasn't around earlier to help solve these little finalproblems." She laughed. "But then-oh, I forgot, you weren't in any positionto do psychological experimentation."Harvey laughed, and I thought I'd better keep quiet. Bertha Nemur was notgoing to let me get the last word in, and if things went any further it wouldreally get nasty.
I saw Dr Strauss and Burt talking to the other man from the WelbergFoundation -- George Raynor. Strauss was saying: "The problem, Mr Raynor, isgetting sufficient funds to work on projects like these, without havingstrings tied to the money. When amounts are earmarked for specific purposes,we can't really operate."Raynor shook his head and waved a big cigar at the small group around him."The real problem is convincing the board that this kind of research haspractical value."
Strauss shook his head. "The point I've been trying to make is that thismoney is intended for research. No one can ever know in advance if a projectis going to result in something useful. Results are often negative. We learnwhat something is not - and that is as important as a positive discovery tothe man who is going to pick up from there. At least he knows what not to do."As I approached the group, I noticed Raynor's wife, to whom I had beenintroduced earlier. She was a beautiful, dark-haired woman of thirty or so. Shewas staring at me, or rather at the top of my head-as if she expectedsomething to sprout. I stared back, and she got uncomfortable and turned backto Dr Strauss. "But what about the present project? Do you anticipate beingable to use these techniques on other retardates? Is this something the worldwill be able to use?"
Strauss shrugged and nodded towards me. "Still too early to tell. Yourhusband helped us put Charlie to work on the project, and a great dealdepends on what he comes up with.""Of course," Mr Raynor put in, "we all understand the necessity for pureresearch in fields like yours. But it would be such a boon to our image if wecould produce a really workable method for achieving permanent resultsoutside the laboratory, if we could show the world that there is sometangible good coming out of it."
I started to speak, but Strauss, who must have sensed what I was going tosay, stood up and put his arm on my shoulder. "All of us at Beekman feel thatthe work Charlie is doing is of the utmost importance. His job now is to findthe truth wherever it leads. We leave it to your foundations to handle thepublic, to educate society."
He smiled at the Raynors and steered me away from them."That," I said, "is not at all what I was going to say.""I didn't think you were," he whispered, holding onto my elbow. "But I couldsee by that gleam in your eye you were ready to cut them to pieces. And Icouldn't allow that, could I?"
"Guess not," I agreed, helping myself to another martini."Is it wise of you to drink so heavily?""No, but I'm trying to relax and I seem to have come to the wrong place.""Well, take it easy," he said, "and keep out of trouble tonight. These peopleare not fools. They know the way you feel about them, and even if you don'tneed them, we do."
I waved a salute at him. "I'll try, but you'd better keep Mrs Raynor awayfrom me. I'm going to goose her if she wiggles her fanny at me again.""Shhhh!" he hissed. "She'll hear you.""Shhhh!" I echoed. "Sorry. I'll just sit here in the corner and keep out ofeveryone's way."
The haze was coming over me, but through it I could see people staring atme. I guess I was muttering to myself-too audibly. I don't remember what Isaid. A little while later I had the feeling that people were leavingunusually early, but I didn't pay much attention until Nemur came up andstood in front of me.
"Just who the hell do you think you are, that you can behave that way? Ihave never seen such insufferable rudeness in my life."I struggled to my feet. "Now, what makes you say that?"Strauss tried to restrain him, but he spluttered and gasped out: "I say it,because you have no gratitude or understanding of the situation. After all,you are indebted to these people if not to us-in more ways than one.""Since when is a guinea pig supposed to be grateful?" I shouted. "I'veserved your purposes, and now I'm trying to work out your mistakes, so howthe hell does that make me indebted to anyone?"
Strauss started to move in to break it up, but Nemur stopped him. "Just aminute. I want to hear this. I think it's time we had this out.""He's had too much to drink," said his wife."Not that much," snorted Nemur. "He's speaking pretty clearly. I've put upwith a lot from him. He's endangered-if not actually destroyed -- our work, andnow I want to hear from his own mouth what he thinks his justification is.""Oh, forget it," I said. "You don't really want to hear the truth.""But I do, Charlie. At least your version of the truth. I want to know ifyou feel any gratitude for all the things that have been done for you-theabilities you've developed, the things you've learned, the experiences you'vehad. Or do you think possibly you were better off before?""In some ways, yes"
That shocked them."I've learned a lot in the past few months," I said. "Not only about CharlieGordon, but about life and people, and I've discovered that nobody reallycares about Charlie Gordon, whether he's a moron or a genius. So whatdifference does it make?"
"Oh," laughed Nemur. "You're feeling sorry for yourself. What did youexpect? This experiment was calculated to raise your intelligence, not tomake you popular. We had no control over what happened to your personality,and you've developed from a likeable, retarded young man into an arrogant,self-centered, antisocial bastard."
"The problem, dear professor, is that you wanted someone who could be madeintelligent but still be kept in a cage and displayed when necessary to reapthe honors you seek. The hitch is that I'm a person."He was angry, and I could see he was torn between ending the fight andtrying once more to beat me down. "You're being unfair, as usual. You knowwe've always treated you well-done everything we could for you.""Everything but treat me as a human being. You've boasted time and againthat I was nothing before the experiment, and I know why. Because if I wasnothing, then you were responsible for creating me, and that makes you mylord and master. You resent the fact that I don't show my gratitude everyhour of the day. Well, believe it or not, I am grateful. But what you did forme-wonderful as it is-doesn't give you the right to treat me like anexperimental animal. I'm an individual now, and so was Charlie before heever walked into that lab. You look shocked! Yes, suddenly we discoverthat I was always a person-even before-and that challenges your belief thatsomeone with an IQ of less than 100 doesn't deserve consideration. ProfessorNemur, I think when you look at me your conscience bothers you.""I've heard enough," he snapped. "You're drunk."
"Ah, no," I assured him. "Because if I get drunk, you'll see a differentCharlie Gordon from the one you've come to know. Yes, the other Charlie who walkedin the darkness is still here with us. Inside me.""He's gone out of his head," said Mrs Nemur. "He's talking as if there weretwo Charlie Gordons. You'd better look after him, doctor."Dr Strauss shook his head. "No. I know what he means. It's come up recentlyin therapy sessions. A peculiar dissociation has taken place in the pastmonth or so. He's had several experiences of perceiving himself as he wasbefore the experiment-as a separate and distinct individual still functioningin his consciousness-as if the old Charlie were struggling for control of thebody"
"No! I never said that! Not struggling for control. Charlie is there, allright, but not struggling with me. Just waiting. He has never tried to takeover or tried to prevent me from doing anything I wanted to do." Then,remembering about Alice, I modified it. "Well, almost never. The humble,self-effacing Charlie you were all talking about a while ago is just waitingpatiently. I'll admit I'm like him in a number of ways, but humility andself-effacement are not among them. I've learned how little they get a personin this world.
"You've become cynical," said Nemur. "That's all this opportunity has meantto you. Your genius has destroyed your faith in the world and in your fellowmen."
"That's not completely true," I said softly. "But I've learned thatintelligence alone doesn't mean a damned thing. Here in your university,intelligence, education, knowledge, have all become great idols. But I knownow there's one thing you've all overlooked: intelligence and education thathasn't been tempered by human affection isn't worth a damn."I helped myself to another martini from the nearby sideboard and continuedmy sermon.
"Don't misunderstand me," I said. "Intelligence is one of the greatest humangifts. But all too often a search for knowledge drives out the search forlove. This is something else I've discovered for myself very recently. Ipresent it to you as a hypothesis: Intelligence without the ability to giveand receive affection leads to mental and moral breakdown, to neurosis, andpossibly even psychosis. And I say that the mind absorbed in and involvedin itself as a self-centered end, to the exclusion of human relationships,can only lead to violence and pain.
"When I was retarded I had lots of friends. Now I have no one. Oh, I knowlots of people. Lots and lots of people. But I don't have any real friends. Notlike I used to have in the bakery. Not a friend in the world who meansanything to me, and no one I mean anything to. " I discovered that my speechwas becoming slurred, and there was a lightness in my head."That can't be right, can it?" I insisted. "I mean, what do you think? Doyou think that's ...that's right?"Strauss came over and took my arm."Charlie, maybe you'd better lie down a while. You've had too much todrink."
"Why y'all looking at me like that? What did I say wrong? Did I saysomething wrong? I din't mean to say anything that wasn't right."I heard the words thick in my mouth, as if my face had been shot full ofnovocaine. I was drunk-completely out of control. At that moment, almost withthe flick of a switch, I was watching the scene from the dining room doorway,and I could see myself as the other Charlie there, near the sideboard, drink inhand, eyes wide and frightened.
"I always try to do the right things. My mother always taught me to be niceto people because she said that way you won't get into trouble and you'llalways have lots of friends."
I could see by the way he was twitching and writhing that he had to get tothe bathroom. Oh, my God, not there in front of them. "Excuse me, please," hesaid, "I got to go... " Somehow, in that drunken stupor, I managed to turnhim away from them and head him toward the bathroom.He made it in time, and after a few seconds I was again in control. I restedmy cheek against the wall, and then washed my face with cool water. Stillgroggy, but I knew I was going to be all right.
That's when I saw Charlie watching me from the mirror behind the washbasin. Idon't know how I knew it was Charlie and not me. Something about the dull,questioning look in his face. His eyes, wide and frightened, as if at one wordfrom me he would turn and run deep into the dimension of the mirrored world. Buthe didn't run. He just stared back at me, mouth open, jaw hanging loosely."Hello," I said, "so you've finally come face to face with me."He frowned, just a bit, as if he didn't understand what I meant, as if hewanted an explanation but didn't know how to ask for it. Then, giving it up,he smiled wryly from the corner of his mouth.
"Stay there right in front of me," I shouted. "I'm sick and tired of yourspying on me from doorways and dark places where I can't catch up with you."He stared."Who are you, Charlie?"Nothing but the smile.I nodded and he nodded back."Then what do you want?" I asked.He shrugged."Oh, come now," I said, "you must want something. You've been following me-"He looked down and I looked at my hands to see what he was looking at. "Youwant these back, don't you? You want me out of here so you can come back andtake over where you left off. I don't blame you. It's your body and yourbrain-and your life, even though you weren't able to make much use of it. Idon't have the right to take it away from you. Nobody does. Who's to say thatmy light is better than your darkness? Who's to say death is better than yourdarkness? Who am I to say? ."But I'll tell you something else, Charlie." I stood up and backed away fromthe mirror. "I'm not your friend. I'm your enemy. I'm not going to give up myintelligence without a struggle. I can't go back down into that cave. There'sno place for me to go now, Charlie. So you've got to stay away. Stay insidemy unconscious where you belong, and stop following me around. I'm not goingto give up-no matter what they all think. No matter how lonely it is. I'mgoing to keep what they've given me and do great things for the world and forother people like you."
As I turned toward the door, I had the impression he was reaching out his handtoward me. But the whole damned thing was foolish. I was just drunk and thatwas my own reflection in the mirror.
When I came out, Strauss wanted to put me into a taxi, but I insisted Icould get home all right. All I needed was a little fresh air, and I didn'twant anyone to come with me. I wanted to walk by myself.I was seeing myself as I really had become: Nemur had said it. I was anarrogant, self-centered bastard. Unlike Charlie, I was incapable of makingfriends or thinking about other people and their problems. I was interestedin myself, and myself only. For one long moment in that mirror I had seenmyself through Charlie's eyeslooked down at myself and saw what I had reallybecome. And I was ashamed.
Hours later I found myself in front of the apartment house, and made my wayupstairs and through the dimly lit hallway. Passing Fay's room, I could seethere was a light on, and I started toward her door. But just as I was aboutto knock I heard her giggling, and a man's answering laugh.It was too late for that.
I let myself into my apartment quietly and stood there for a while in thedark, not daring to move, not daring to turn on the light. Just stood thereand felt the whirlpool in my eyes.What has happened to me? Why am I so alone in the world?4:30 A.M.-The solution came to me, just as I was dozing off. Illuminated!Everything fits together, and I see what I should have known from thebeginning. No more sleep. I've got to get back to the lab and test thisagainst the results from the computer. This, finally, is the flaw in theexperiment. I've found it.
Now what becomes of me?
August 26 - LETTER TO PROFESSOR NEMUR (COPY)Dear Professor Nemur:Under separate cover I am sending you a copy of my report entitled: "TheAlgernon-Gordon Effect: A Study of Structure and Function of IncreasedIntelligence," which may be published if you see fit.As you know, my experiments are completed. I have included in my report allof my formulas, as well as mathematical analyses of the data in the appendix.Of course, these should be verified.
The results are clear. The more sensational aspects of my rapid climb cannotobscure the facts. The surgery and injection techniques developed by you andDr Strauss must be viewed as having little or no practical applicability, atthe present time, to the increase of human intelligence.Reviewing the data on Algernon: although he is still in his physical youth,he has regressed mentally. Motor activity impaired; general reduction ofglandular functioning; accelerated loss of coordination, and strongindications of progressive amnesia.
As I show in my report, these and other physical and mental deteriorationsyndromes can be predicted with statistically significant results by theapplication of my new formula. Although the surgical stimulus to which wewere both subjected resulted in an intensification and acceleration of allmental processes, the flaw, which I have taken the liberty of calling the"Algernon-Gordon Effect," is the logical extension of the entire intelligencespeed-up. The hypothesis here proved may be described most simply in thefollowing terms:
ARTIFICIALLY-INDUCED INTELLIGENCE DETERIORATES AT A RATE OF TIMEDIRECTLY PROPORTIONAL TO THE QUANTITY OF THE INCREASE.As long as I am able to write, I will continue to put down my thoughts andideas in these progress reports. It is one of my few solitary pleasures andis certainly necessary to the completion of this research. However, by allindications, my own mental deterioration will be quite rapid.I have checked and rechecked my data a dozen times in hope of finding anerror, but I am sorry to say the results must stand. Yet, I am grateful forthe little bit that I here add to the knowledge of the function of the humanmind and of the laws governing the artificial increase of human intelligence.The other night Dr Strauss was saying that an experimental failure, thedisproving of a theory, was as important to the advancement of learning as asuccess would be. I know now that this is true. I am sorry, however, that my owncontribution to the field must rest upon the ashes of the work of this staff,and especially those who have done so much for me.
Yours truly,Charles Gordon encl: report copy: Dr StraussThe Welberg FoundationSeptember 1 - I must not panic. Soon there will be signs of emotionalinstability and forgetfulness, the first symptoms of the burnout. Will Irecognize these in myself? All I can do now is keep recording my mental stateas objectively as possible, remembering that this psychological journal willbe the first of its kind, and possibly the last.
This morning Nemur had Burt take my report and the statistical data down toHallston University to have some of the top men in the field verify myresults and the application of my formulas. All last week they had Burt goingover my experiments and methodological charts. I shouldn't really be annoyedby their precautions. After all, I'm just a Charlie-come-lately, and it isdifficult for Nemur to accept the fact that my work might be beyond him. Hehad come to believe in the myth of his own authority, and after all I am anoutsider.
I don't really care any more what he thinks, or what any of them think forthat matter. There isn't time. The work is done, the data is in, and all thatremains is to see whether I have accurately projected the curve on theAlgernon figures as a prediction of what will happen to me.
Alice cried when I told her the news. Then she ran out. I've got to impresson her that there is no reason for her to feel guilty about this.September 2 - Nothing definite yet. I move in a silence of clear whitelight. Everything around me is waiting. I dream of being alone on the top of amountain, surveying the land around me, greens and yellows-and the sundirectly above, pressing my shadow into a tight ball around my legs. Asthe sun drops into the afternoon sky, the shadow undrapes itselfand stretches out toward the horizon, long and thin, and far behind me...I want to say here again what I've said already to Dr Strauss. No one is inany way to blame for what has happened. This experiment was carefullyprepared, extensively tested on animals, and statistically validated. Whenthey decided to use me as the first human test, they were reasonably certainthat there was no physical danger involved. There was no way to foresee thepsychological pitfalls. I don't want anyone to suffer because of what happensto me.
The only question now is: How much can I hang on to?September 15 - Nemur says my results have been confirmed. It means that theflaw is central and brings the entire hypothesis into question. Someday theremight be a way to overcome this problem, but that time is not yet. I haverecommended that no further tests be made on human beings until these thingsare clarified by additional research on animals.It is my own feeling that the most successful line of research will be thattaken by the men studying enzyme imbalances. As with so many other things,time is the key factor -- speed in discovering the deficiency, and speed inadministering hormonal substitutes. I would like to help in that area ofresearch, and in the search for radioisotopes that may be used in localcortical control, but I know now that I won't have the time.September 17 - Becoming absent minded. Put things away on my desk or in thedrawers of the lab tables, and when I can't find them I lose my temper andflare up at everyone. First signs?
Algernon died two days ago. I found him at four thirty in the morning whenI came back to the lab after wandering around down at the waterfront-on hisside, stretched out in the corner of his cage. As if he were running in hissleep.
Dissection shows that my predictions were right. Compared to the normalbrain, Algernon's had decreased in weight and there was a general smoothing outof the cerebral convolutions as well as a deepening and broadening of brainfissures.
It's frightening to think that the same thing might be happening to me rightnow. Seeing it happen to Algernon makes it real. For the first time, I'mafraid of the future.I put Algernon's body into a small metal container and took him home withme. I wasn't going to let them dump him into the incinerator. It's foolishand sentimental, but late last night I buried him in the back yard. I wept asI put a bunch of wild flowers on the grave.September 21 - I'm going to Marks Street to visit my mother tomorrow. A dreamlast night triggered off a sequence of memories, lit up a whole slice of thepast and the important thing is to get it down on paper quickly before Iforget it because I seem to forget things sooner now. It has to do with mymother, and now-more than ever-I want to understand her, to know what she waslike and why she acted the way she did. I mustn't hate her.I've got to come to terms with her before I see her so that I won't actharshly or foolishly.
September 27 - I should have written this down right away, because it'simportant to make this record complete.I went to see Rose three days ago. Finally, I forced myself to borrow Burt'scar again. I was afraid, and yet I knew I had to go.At first when I got to Marks Street I thought I had made a mistake. Itwasn't the way I remembered it at all. It was a filthy street. Vacant lotswhere many of the houses had been torn down. On the sidewalk, a discardedrefrigerator with its face ripped off, and on the curb an old mattress withwire intestines hanging out of its belly. Some houses had boarded up windows,and others looked more like patched-up shanties than homes. I parked the cara block away from the house and walked.
There were no children playing on Marks Street not at all like the mentalpicture I had brought with me of children everywhere, and Charlie watchingthem through the front window (strange that most of my memories of the streetare framed by the window, with me always inside watching the childrenplay). Now there were only old people standing in the shade of tired porches.As I approached the house, I had a second shock. My mother was on the frontstoop, in an old brown sweater, washing the ground floor windows from theoutside even though it was cold and windy. Always working to show theneighbors what a good wife and mother she was.
The most important thing had always been what other peoplethought-appearances before herself or her family. And righteous about it. Timeand again Matt had insisted that what others thought about you wasn'tthe only thing in life. But it did no good. Norma had to dress well; thehouse had to have fine furniture; Charlie had to be kept inside so that otherpeople wouldn't know anything was wrong.
At the gate, I paused to watch as she straightened up to catch her breath. Seeingher face made me tremble, but it was not the face I had struggled sohard to recall. Her hair had become white and streaked with iron, and the,flesh of her thin cheeks was wrinkled. Perspiration made her foreheadglisten. She caught sight of me and stared back.I wanted to look away, to turn back down the street, but I couldn't-notafter having come so far. I would just ask directions, pretending I was lostin a strange neighborhood. Seeing her had been enough. But all I did wasstand there. waiting for her to do something first. And all she did was standthere and look at me.
"Do you want something?" Her voice, hoarse, was an unmistakable echo downthe corridors of memory.
I opened my mouth, but nothing came out. My mouth worked, I know, and Istruggled to speak to her, to get something out, because in that moment Icould see recognition in her eyes. This was not at all the way I wanted herto see me. Not standing there in front of her, dumbly, unable to make myselfunderstood. But my tongue kept getting in the way, like a huge obstruction,and my mouth was dry.
Finally, something came out. Not what I had intended (I had plannedsomething soothing and encouraging, to take control of the situation and wipeout all the past and pain with a few words) but all that came out of my crackedthroat was: "Maaa... "
With all the things I had learned-in all the languages I had mastered-all Icould say to her, standing on the porch staring at me, was, "Maaaa." Like adry-mouthed lamb at the udder.
She wiped her forehead with the back of her arm and frowned at me, as if shecould not see me clearly. I stepped forward, past the gate to the walk, andthen toward the steps. She drew back.At first, I wasn't sure whether or not she really recognized me, but thenshe gasped: "Charlie!... " She didn't scream it or whisper it. She justgasped it as one might do coming out of a dream."Ma... " I started up the steps. "It's me... "
My movement startled her, and she stepped backwards, kicking over the bucketof soapy water, and the dirty suds rushed down the steps. "What are you doinghere?"'
"I just wanted to see you... talk to you... "Because my tongue kept getting in my way, my voice came out of my throatdifferently, with a thick whining tone, as I might have spoken a long timeago. "Don't go away," I begged. "Don't run away from me."But she had gone inside the vestibule and locked the door. A moment later Icould see her peering at me from behind the sheer white curtain of the doorwindow, her eyes terrified. Behind the window her lips moved soundlessly. "Goaway! Leave me alone!"Why? Who was she to deny me this way? By what right did she turn away fromme?
"Let me in! I want to talk to you! Let me in!" I banged on the door againstthe glass so hard it cracked, and the crack spread a web that caught my skinfor a moment and held it fast. She must have thought I was out of my mind andhad come to harm her. She let go of the outer door and fled down the hallwaythat led into the apartment.I pushed again. The hook gave way and, unprepared for the sudden yielding, Ifell into the vestibule, off balance. My hand was bleeding from the glassI had broken, and not knowing what else to do, I put my hand into my pocketto prevent the blood from staining her freshly scrubbed linoleum.I started in, past the stairs I had seen so often in my nightmares. I hadoften been pursued up that long, narrow staircase by demons who grabbed at mylegs and pulled me down into the cellar below, while I tried to screamwithout voice, strangling on my tongue and gagging in silence. Like thesilent boys at Warren.
The people who lived on the second floor-our landlord and landlady, theMeyers-had always been kind to me. They gave me sweets and let me come to sitin their kitchen and play with their dog. I wanted to see them, but withoutbeing told I knew they were gone and dead and that strangers lived upstairs.That path was now closed to me forever.At the end of the hallway, the door through which Rose had fled was locked,and for a moment I stood undecided.
"Open the door."The answer was the high-pitched yapping of a small dog. It took me bysurprise.
"All right," I said. "I don't intend to hurt you or anything, but I've comea long way, and I'm not leaving without talking to you. If you don't open thedoor, I'm going to break it down."I heard her saying: "Shhhh, Nappie... Here, into the bedroom you go." Amoment later I heard the click of the lock. The door opened and she stoodthere staring at me.
"Ma," I whispered, "I'm not going to do anything. I just want to talk toyou. You've got to understand, I'm not the same as I was. I've changed. I'mnormal now. Don't you understand? I'm not retarded any more. I'm not a moron. I'mjust like anyone else. I'm normal-just like you and Matt and Norma."I tried to keep talking, babbling so she wouldn't close the door. I tried totell her the whole thing, all at once. "They changed me, performed anoperation on me and made me different, the way you always wanted me tobe. Didn't you read about it in the newspapers? A new scientific experiment thatchanges your capacity for intelligence, and I'm the first one they tried iton. Can't you understand? Why are you looking at me that way? I'm smartnow, smarter than Norma, or Uncle Herman, or Matt. I know things evencollege professors don't know. Talk to me! You can be proud of me now andtell all the neighbors. You don't have to hide me in the cellar when companycomes. Just talk to me. Tell me about things, the way it was when I was alittle boy, that's all I want. I won't hurt you. I don't hate you. But I'vegot to know about myself, to understand myself before it's too late. Don'tyou see, I can't be a complete person unless I can understand myself, andyou're the only one in the world who can help me now. Let me come in and sitdown for a little while."
It was the way I spoke rather than what I said that hypnotized her. Shestood there in the doorway and stared at me. Without thinking, I pulled mybloody hand out of my pocket and clenched it in my pleading. When she saw ither expression softened."You hurt yourself... " She didn't necessarily feel sorry for me. It wasthe sort of thing she might have felt for a dog that had torn its paw, or acat that had been gashed in a fight. It wasn't because I was her Charlie, butin spite of it.
"Come in and wash it. I've got some bandage and iodine."I followed her to the cracked sink with the corrugated drainboard at whichshe had so often washed my face and hands after I came in from the back yard,or when I was ready to eat or go to sleep. She watched me roll up my sleeves."You shouldn't have broke the window. The landlord's gonna be sore, and Idon't have enough money to pay for it." Then, as if impatient with the way Iwas doing it, she took the soap from me and washed my hand. As she did it,she concentrated so hard that I kept silent, afraid of breaking thespell. Occasionally she clucked her tongue, or sighed, "Charlie, Charlie, alwaysgetting yourself into a mess. When are you going to learn to take care ofyourself?" She was back twenty-five years earlier when I was her littleCharlie and she was willing to fight for my place in the world.When the blood was washed off and she had dried my hands with papertoweling, she looked up into my face and her eyes went round with frights"Oh, my GOD' she gasped, and backed away.
I started talking again, softly, persuasively to convince her that nothingwas wrong and I meant no harm. But as I spoke I could tell her mind waswandering. She looked around vaguely, put her hand to her mouth and groanedas she looked at me again. "The house is such a mess," she said. "I wasn'texpecting company. Look at those windows, and that woodwork over there.""That's all right, Ma. Don't worry about it.""I've got to wax those floors again. It's got to be clean." She noticed somefingermarks on the door and taking up her washrag she scrubbed them away. Whenshe looked up and saw me watching her, she frowned. "Have you come aboutthe electric bill?"
Before I could say no, she wagged her finger, scolding, "I intend to send acheck out the first of the month, but my husband is out of town on business. Itold them all they don't have to worry about the money, because my daughtergets paid this week, and we'll be able to take care of all our bills. Sothere's no need bothering me for money."
"Is she your only child? Don't you have any other children?"She started, and then her eyes looked far away. "I had a boy. So brilliantthat all the other mothers were jealous of him. And they put the evil eye onhim. They called it the IQ but it was the evil-IQ He would have been agreat man, if not for that. He was really very bright exceptional, they said. Hecould have been a genius... "
She picked up a scrub brush. "Excuse me now. I've got to get things ready. Mydaughter has a young man coming for dinner, and I've got to get this placeclean." She got down on her knees and started to scrub the already shiningfloor. She didn't look up again.
She was muttering to herself now, and I sat down at the kitchen table. Iwould wait until she came out of it, until she recognized me and understoodwho I was. I couldn't leave until she knew that I was her Charlie. Somebodyhad to understand.
She had started humming sadly to herself, but she stopped, her rag poisedmidway between the bucket and the floor, as if suddenly aware of my presencebehind her.
She turned, her face tired and her eyes glistening, and cocked her head."How could it be? I don't understand. They told me you could never be changed.""They performed an operation on me, and that changed me. I'm famous now. They'veheard of me all over the world. I'm intelligent now, Mom. I can read and write,and I can -"
"Thank God," she whispered. "My prayers-all these years I thought He didn'thear me, but He was listening all the time, just waiting His own good time todo His will."She wiped her face in her apron, and when I put my arm around her, she weptfreely on my shoulder. All the pain was washed away, and I was glad I hadcome.
"I've got to tell everyone," she said, smiling, "all those teachers at theschool. Oh, wait till you see their faces when I tell them. And theneighbors. And Uncle Herman-I've got to tell Uncle Herman. He'll be sopleased. And wait until your father comes home, and your sister! Oh, she'llbe so happy to see you. You have no idea."
She hugged me, talking excitedly, making plans for the new life we weregoing to have together. I hadn't the heart to remind her that most of mychildhood teachers were gone from this school, that the neighbors had longmoved away, that Uncle Herman had died many years ago, and that my father hadleft her. The nightmare of all those years had been pain enough. I wanted tosee her smiling and know I had been the one to make her happy. For the firsttime in my life, I had brought a smile to her lips.Then after a while, she paused thoughtfully as if remembering something. Ihad the feeling her mind was going to wander. "No!" I shouted, startling herback to reality, "Wait, Ma! There's something else. Something I want you tohave before I go."
"Go? You can't go away now.""I have to go, Ma. I have things to do. But I'll write to you, and I'll sendyou money.""But when will you come back?""I don't know-yet. But before I go, I want you to have this.""A magazine?""Not exactly. It's a scientific report I wrote. Very technical. Look, it's calledThe Algernon-Gordon Effect. Something I discovered, and it's named partly after me. Iwant you to keep a copy of the report so that you can show people that your son turnedout to be more than a dummy after all."She took it and looked at it in awe. "It's... it's your name. I knew itwould happen. I always said it would happen someday. I tried everything Icould. You were too young to remember, but I tried. I told them all thatyou'd go to college and become a professional man and make your mark in theworld. They laughed, but I told them."She smiled at me through tears, and then a moment later she wasn't lookingat me any more. She picked up her rag and began to wash the woodwork aroundthe kitchen door, humming-more happily, I thought-as if in a dream.The dog started barking again. The front door opened and closed and a voicecalled: "Okay, Nappie. Okay, it's me." The dog was jumping excitedly againstthe bedroom door.
I was furious at being trapped here. I didn't want to see Norma. We hadnothing to say to each other, and I didn't want my visit spoiled. There wasno back door. The only way would be to climb out the window into the backyard and go over the fence. But someone might mistake me for a burglar.As I heard her key in the door, I whispered to my mother-I don't knowwhy-"Norma's home." I touched her arm, but she didn't hear me. She was toobusy humming to herself as she washed the woodwork.The door opened. Norma saw me and frowned. She didn't recognize me atfirst - it was dim, the lights hadn't been turned on. Putting down the shoppingbag she was carrying, she switched on the light. "Who are you?... " Butbefore I could answer, her hand went over her mouth, and she slumped backagainst the door.
"Charlie!" She said it the same way my mother had, gasping. And she lookedthe way my mother used to look-thin, sharp features, birdlike, pretty."Charliel My God, what a shockl You might have gotten in touch and warned me. Youshould have called. I don't know what to say .." She looked at my mother, sittingon the floor near the sink.
"Is she all right? You didn't shock her or anything... ""She came out of it for a while. We had a little talk.""I'm glad. She doesn't remember much these days. It's old age-senility. Dr.Portmanwants me to put her into a nursing home, but I can't do it. I can't stand to thinkof her in one of those institutions." She opened the bedroom door to let the dogout, and when he jumped and whined joyously, she picked him up and hugged him."I just can't do that to my own mother."Then she smiled at me uncertainly. "Well, what a surprise. I never dreamed. Let melook at you. I never would have recognized you. I'd have passed you by in thestreet. So different." She sighed. "I'm glad to see you, Charlie.""Are you? I didn't think you'd want to see me again.""Oh, Charlie!" She took my hands in hers. "Don't say that. I am glad to see you. I'vebeen expecting you. I didn't know when, but I knew someday you'd come back. EversinceI read that you had run away in Chicago."She pulled back to look up at me."You don't know how I've thought about you and wondered where you were andwhat you were doing. Until that professor came herelast when was it? Last March? Just seven months ago?-I had no idea you werestill alive. She told me you died in Warren. I believed it all theseyears. When they told me you were alive and they needed you for theexperiment, I didn't know what to do.Professor... Nemur? - is that his name? - wouldn't let me see you. He wasafraid to upset you before the operation. But when I saw in the papers that itworked and you had become a genius -- oh, my!-you don't know what it felt liketo read about that.
"I told all the people in my office, and the girls at my bridge club. Ishowed them your picture in the paper, and I told them you'd be coming backhere to see us one day. And you have. You really have. You didn't forget us."She hugged me again. "Oh, Charlie. Charlie... it'sso wonderful to find all of a sudden I've got a big brother. You have noidea. Sit down let me make you something to eat. You've got to tell me allabout it and whatyour plans are. I... I don't know where to start askingquestions. I must sound ridiculous-like a girl who has just found out her brotheris a hero, or a movie star, or something."I was confused. I had not expected a greeting like this from Norma. It hadnever occurred to me that all these years alone with my mother might changeher. And yet it was inevitable. She was no longer the spoiled brat of mymemories. She had grown up, had become warm and sympathetic and affectionate.We talked. Ironic to sit there with my sister, the two of us talking aboutmy mother-right there in the room with us-as if she wasn't there. WheneverNorma would refer to their life together, I'd look to see if Rose waslistening, but she was deep in her own world, as if she didn't understand ourlanguage, as if none of it concerned her any more. She drifted around thekitchen like a ghost, picking things up, putting things away, without evergetting in the way. It was frightening.I watched Norma feed her dog. "So you finally got him. Nappie-short forNapoleon, isn't it?"
She straightened up and frowned. "How did you know?"I explained about my memory: the time she had brought home her test paperhoping to get the dog, and how Matt had forbidden it. As I told it, the frownbecame deeper."I don't remember any of it. Oh, Charlie, was I so mean to you?""There's one memory I'm curious about. I'm not reallysure if it's a memory, or a dream, or if I just made it allup. It was the last time we played together as friends. Wewere in the basement; and we were playing a game withthe lamp shades on our heads, pretending we wereChinese coolies-jumping up and down on an old mattress. You were seven oreight, I think, and I was aboutthirteen. And, as I recall, you bounced off the mattressand hit your head against the wall. It wasn't veryhard just a bump-but Mom and Dad came runningdown because you were screaming, and you said I wastrying to kill you.
"She blamed Matt for not watching me, for leaving us alone together, and shebeat me with a strap until I was nearly unconscious. Do you remember it? Didit really happen that way?"Norma was fascinated by my description of the memory, as if it awakenedsleeping images. "It's all so vague. You know, I thought that was my dream. Iremember us wearing the lampshades, and jumping up and down on themattresses."
She stared out of the window."I hated you because they fussed over you all the time. They never spanked youfor not doing your homework right, or for not bringing home the best marks. Youskipped classes most of the time and played games, and I had to go to the hardclasses in school. Oh, how I hated you. In school the other children scribbledpictures on the blackboard, a boy with a duncecap on his head, and they wrote Norma'sBrother under it. And they scribbled things on the sidewalk in the schoolyard-Moron'sSister and Dummy Gordon Family. And then one day when I wasn't invited toEmily Raskin's birthday party, I knew it was because of you. And when we wereplaying there in the basement with those lampshades on our heads, I had toget even." She started to cry. "So I lied and said you hurt me. Oh, Charlie,what a fool I was-what a spoiled brat. I'm so ashamed-""Don't blame yourself. It must have been hard to face the other kids. Forme, this kitchen was my world-and that room there. The rest of it didn'tmatter as long as this was safe. You had to face the rest of the world.""Why did they send you away, Charlie? Why couldn't you have stayed here andlived with us? I always wondered about that. Every time I asked her, shealways said it was for your own good."
"In a way she was right."She shook her head. "She sent you away because of me, didn't she? Oh, Charlie, whydid it have to be? Why did all this happen to us?"I didn't know what to tell her. I wished I could say that like the House ofAtreus or Cadmus we were suffering for the sins of our forefathers, orfulfilling an ancient Greek oracle. But I had no answers for her, or for myself."It's past," I said. "I'm glad I met you again. It makes it a littleeasier."
She grabbed my arm suddenly. "Charlie, you don'tknow what I've been through all these years with her. The apartment, this street,my job. It's all been a nightmare, coming home each day, wondering if she's stillhere, if she's harmed herself, guilty for thinking about things like that."I stood up and let her rest against my shoulder, and she wept. "Oh, Charlie. I'mglad you're back now. We've needed someone. I'm so tired..."I had dreamed of a time like this, but now that it was here, what good wasit? I couldn't tell her what was going to happen to me. And yet, could Iaccept her affection on false pretenses? Why kid myself? If I had still beenthe old, feeble-minded, dependent Charlie, she wouldn't have spoken to me thesame way. So what right did I have to it now? My mask would soon be rippedaway.
"Don't cry, Norma. Everything will work out all right." I heard myselfspeaking in reassuring platitudes. "I'll try to take care of you both. I havea little money saved, and with what the Foundation has been paying me, I'llbe able to send you some money regularly-for a while anyway.""But you're not going awayl You've got to stay with us now-""I've got to do some traveling, some research, make a few speeches, but I'lltry to come back to visit you. Take care of her. She's been through alot. I'll help you for as long as I can.""Charlie! No, don't go!" She clung to me. "I'm frightened!"The role I had always wanted to play-the big brother.At that moment, I sensed that Rose, who had been sitting in the cornerquietly, was staring at us. Something in her face had changed. Her eyes werewide, and she leaned forward on the edge of her seat. All I could think ofwas a hawk ready to swoop down.I pushed Norma away from me, but before I could say anything, Rose was onher feet. She had taken the kitchen knife from the table and was pointing atme.
"What are you doing to her? Get away from her! I told you what I'd do to youif I ever caught you touching your sister again! Dirty mind! You don't belongwith normal people!"We both jumped back, and for some insane reason, I felt guilty, as if I hadbeen caught doing something wrong, and I knew Norma felt the same way. It wasas if my mother's accusation had made it true, that we were doing somethingobscene.
Norma screamed at her: "Mother! Put down that knife!"Seeing Rose standing there with the knife brought back the picture of thatnight she had forced Matt to take me away. She was reliving that now. Icouldn't speak or move. The nausea swept over me, the choking tension, thebuzzing in my ears, my stomach knotting and stretching as if it wanted totear itself out of my body.She had a knife, and Alice had a knife, and my father had a knife, andDr.Strauss had a knife...Fortunately, Norma had the presence of mind to take it away from her, butshe couldn't erase the fear in Rose's eyes as she screamed at me. "Get himout of here! He's got no right to look at his sister with sex in his mind!"Rose screamed and sank back into the chair, weeping.I didn't know what to say, and neither did Norma. We were both embarrassed. Nowshe knew why I had been sent away.I wondered if I had ever done anything to justify my mother's fear. Therewere no such memories, but how could I be sure there weren't horriblethoughts repressed behind the barriers of my tortured conscience? In thesealed-off passageways, beyond blind alleys, that I would never see. PossiblyI will never know. Whatever the truth is, I must not hate Rose for protectingNorma. I must understand the way she saw it. Unless I forgive her, I willhave nothing.
Norma was trembling."Take it easy," I said. "She doesn't know what she's doing. It wasn't me shewas raving at. It was the old Charlie. She was afraid of what he might do toyou. I can't blame her for wanting to protect you. But we don't have to thinkabout it now, because he's gone forever, isn't he?"She wasn't listening to me. There was a dreamy expression on her face. "I'vejust had one of those strange experiences where something happens, and youhave the feeling you know it's going to happen, as if it all took placebefore, the exact same way, and you watch it unfold again... .""A very common experience."She shook her head. "Just now, when I saw her with that knife, it was likea dream I had a long time ago."What was the use of telling her she had undoubtedly been awake that night asa child, and had seen the whole thing from her room-that it had beenrepressed and twisted until she imagined it as a fantasy. No reason forburdening her with the truth. She would have enough sadness with my mother inthe days to come. I would gladly have taken the burden and the pain off herhands, but there was no sense in starting something I couldn't finish. Iwould have my own suffering to live with. There was no way to stop the sandsof knowledge from slipping through the hourglass of my mind."I've got to go now," I said. "Take care of yourself, and of her." Isqueezed her hand. As I went out, Napoleon barked at me.I held it in for as long as I could, but when I reached the street it wasimpossible. It's hard to write it down, but people turned to look at me as Iwalked back to the car, crying like a child. I couldn't help myself, and Ididn't care.
As I walked, the ridiculous words drummed themselves into my head over andover again, rising to the rhythm of a buzzing noise:Three blind mice...three blind mice, See how they run! See how they run!They all run after the farmer's wife, She cut off their tails with a carvingknife, Did you ever see such a sight in your life, As three... blind ..mice?
I tried to shut it out of my ears, but I couldn't, and once when I turned tolook back at the house and the porch, I saw the face of a boy, staring at me,his cheek pressed against the window pane.

%%%%%PROGRESS REPORT 17October 3 - Downhill. Thoughts of suicide to stop it allnow while I am still in control and aware of the world around me. Butthen I think of Charlie waiting at the window. His life is notmine to throw away. I've just borrowed it for a while, and now I'm beingasked to return it.
I must remember I'm the only person this ever happened to. As long as I can, I'vegot to keep putting down my thoughts and feelings. These progress reports areCharlie Gordon's contribution to mankind.I have become edgy and irritable. Having fights with people in the buildingabout playing the hi-fi set late at night. I've been doing that a lot sinceI've stopped playing the piano. It isn't right to keep it going all hours,but I do it to keep myself awake. I know I should sleep, but I begrudge everysecond of waking time. It's not just because of the nightmares; it's becauseI'm afraid of letting go.
I tell myself there'll be time enough to sleep later, when it's dark.Mr Vernor in the apartment below never used to complain, but now he'salways banging on the pipes or on the ceiling of his apartment so that I hearthe pounding beneath my feet. I ignored it at first, but last night he cameup in his bathrobe. We quarreled, and I slammed the door in his face. An hourlater he was back with a policeman who told me I couldn't play records thatloudly at 4 A.M. The smile on Vernor's face so enraged me that it was all Icould do to keep from hitting him. When they left I smashed all the recordsand the machine. I've been kidding myself anyway. I don't really like thatkind of music any more.
October 4 - Strangest therapy session I ever had. Strauss was upset. It wassomething he hadn't expected either.What happened-I don't dare call it a memory-was a psychic experience or ahallucination. I won't attempt to explain or interpret it, but will onlyrecord what happened.
I was touchy when I came into his office, but he pretended not to notice. Ilay down on the couch immediately, and he, as usual, took his seat to oneside and a little behind me-just out of sight-and waited for me to begin theritual of pouring out all the accumulated poisons of the mind.I peered back at him over my head. He looked tired, and flabby, and somehowhe reminded me of Matt sitting on his barber's chair waiting for customers. Itold Strauss of the association and he nodded and waited."Are you waiting for customers?" I asked. "You ought to have this couchdesigned like a barber's chair. Then when you want free association, youcould stretch your patient out the way the barber does to lather up hiscustomer, and when the fifty minutes are up, you could tilt the chair forwardagain and hand him a mirror so he can see what he looks like on the outsideafter you've shaved his ego."
He said nothing, and while I felt ashamed at the way I was abusing him, Icouldn't stop. "Then your patient could come in at each session and say, `Alittle off the top of my anxiety, please,' or `Don't trim the super-ego tooclose, if you don't mind,' or he might even come in for an egg shampoo-Imean, ego shampoo. Aha! Did you notice that slip of the tongue, doctor? Makea note of it. I said I wanted an egg shampoo instead of an ego shampoo. Egg...ego... close, aren't they? Does that mean I want to be washed cleanof my sins? Reborn? Is it baptism symbolism? Or are we shaving tooclose? Does an idiot have an id?"I waited for a reaction, but he just shifted in his chair."Are you awake?" I asked."I'm listening, Charlie.""Only listening? Don't you ever get angry?""Why do you want me to be angry with you?", I sighed. "Stolid Strauss: unmovable. I'lltell yousomething. I'm sick and tired of coming here. What's thesense of therapy any more? You know as well as I dowhat's going to happen.""But I think you don't want to stop," he said. "You want to go on with it,don't you?""It's stupid. A waste of my time and yours"I lay there in the dim light and stared at the pattern of squares on theceiling ..noise-absorbing tiles with thousands of tiny holes soaking upevery word. Sound buried alive in little holes in the ceiling.I found myself becoming lightheaded. My mind was a blank, and that wasunusual because during therapy sessions I always had a great deal of materialto bring out and talk about. Dreams... memories... associations... problems... Butnow I felt isolated and empty. Only Stolid Strauss breathing behind me."I feel strange," I said."You want to talk about it?"Oh, how brilliant, how subtle he was! What the hell was I doing thereanyway, having my associations absorbed by little holes in the ceiling andbig holes in my therapist?"I don't know if I want to talk about it," I said. "I feel unusually hostiletoward you today." And then I told him what I had been thinking.Without seeing him, I could tell he was nodding to himself."It's hard to explain," I said. "A feeling I've had once or twice before,just before I fainted. A lightheadedness... everything intense... butmy body feels cold and numb... ""Go on." His voice had an edge of excitement. "What else?""I can't feel my body any more. I'm numb. I have the feeling that Charlie isclose by. My eyes are open I'm sure of that are they?""Yes, wide open."
"And yet I see a blue-white glow from the walls and the ceiling gatheringinto a shimmering ball. Now it's suspended in midair. Light... forcingitself into my eyes... and my brain... Everything in the room is aglow...I have the feeling of floating... or rather expanding up and out...and yet without looking down I know my body is still here on the couch.Is this a hallucination?"Charlie, are you all right?"Or the things described by the mystics?I hear his voice but I don't want to answer him. It annoys me that he isthere. I've got to ignore him. Be passive and let this-whatever it is-fill mewith the light and absorb me into itself."What do you see, Charlie? What's the matter?"Upward, moving, like a leaf in an upcurrent of warm air. Speeding, the atomsof my body hurtling away from each other. I grow lighter, less dense, andlarger... larger exploding outward into the sun. I am an expanding universeswimming upward in a silent sea. Small at first, encompassing with my body,the room, the building, the city, the country, until I know that if I lookdown I will see my shadow blotting out the earth.
Light and unfeeling. Drifting and expanding through time and space.And then, as I know I am about to pierce the crust of existence, like aflying fish leaping out of the sea, I feel the pull from below.It annoys me. I want to shake it off. On the verge of blending with theuniverse I hear the whispers around the ridges of consciousness. And thatever-so-slight tug holds me to the finite and mortal world below.Slowly, as waves recede, my expanding spirit shrinks back into earthlydimensions-not voluntarily, because I would prefer to lose myself, but I ampulled from below, back to myself, into myself, so that for just one momentI am on the couch again, fitting the fingers of my awareness into the gloveof my flesh. And I know I can move this finger or wink that eye-if I want to. ButI don't want to move. I will not move!
I wait, and leave myself open, passive, to whatever this experience means. Charliedoesn't want me to pierce the upper curtain of the mind. Charlie doesn't want toknow what lies beyond.
Does he fear seeing God?Or seeing nothing?As I lie here waiting, the moment passes during which I am myself in myself,and again I lose all feeling of body or sensation. Charlie is drawing me downinto myself. I stare inward in the center of my unseeing eye at the red spotthat transforms itself into a multipetaled flower-the shimmering, swirling,luminescent flower that lies deep in the core of my unconscious.I am shrinking. Not in the sense of the atoms of mybody becoming closer and more dense, but a fusion-asthe atoms of my-self merge into microcosm. There will begreat heat and unbearable light-the hell within hell butI don't look at the light, only at the flower, unmultiplying,undividing itself back from the many toward one. Andfor- an instant the shimmering flower turns into the golden disk twirling ona string, and then to the bubble of swirling rainbows, and finally I am backin the cave where everything is quiet and dark and I swim the wet labyrinthsearching for one to receive me... embrace me... absorb me... intoitself.
That I may begin.In the core I see the light again, an opening in the darkest of caves, nowtiny and far away-through the wrong end of a telescope-brilliant, blinding,shimmering, and once again the multipetaled flower (swirling lotus-thatfloats near the entrance of the unconscious). At the entrance of that cave Iwill find the answer, if I dare go back and plunge through it into the grottoof light beyond.
Not yet!I am afraid. Not of life, or death, or nothingness, but of wasting it as ifI had never been. And as I start through the opening, I feel the pressurearound me, propelling me in violent wavelike motions toward the mouth of thecave.
It's too small! I can't get through!And suddenly I am hurled against the walls, again and again, and forcedthrough the opening where the light threatens to burst my eyes. Again, I knowI will pierce the crust into that holy light. More than I can bear. Pain asI have never known, and coldness, and nausea, and the great buzzing over myhead flapping like a thousand wings. I open my eyes, blinded by the intenselight. And flail the air and tremble and scream.I came out of it at the insistence of a hand shaking me roughly. Dr.Strauss."Thank God," he said, when I looked into his eyes. "You had me worried."
I shook my head. "I'm all right.""I think maybe that's all for today."I got up and swayed as I regained my perspective. The room seemed verysmall. "Not only for today," I said. "I don't think I should have any moresessions. I don't want to see any more."
He was upset, but he didn't try to talk me out of it. I took my hat and coatand left.
And now-Plato's words mock me in the shadows on the ledge behind the flames:" ..the men of the cave would say of him that up he went and down he camewithout his eyes... .
October 5 - Sitting down to type these reports is difficult, and I can't thinkwith the tape recorder going. I keep putting it off for most of the day, butI know how important it is, and I've got to do it. I've told myself I won'thave dinner until I sit down and write something-anything.Professor Nemur sent for me again this morning. He wanted me at the lab forsome tests, the kind I used to do. At first I figured it was only right,because they're still paying me, and it's important to have the recordcomplete, but when I got down to Beekman and went through it all with Burt, Iknew it would be too much for me.
First it was the paper and pencil maze. I remembered how it was before whenI learned to do it quickly, and when I raced against Algernon. I could tellit was taking me a lot longer to solve the maze now. Burt had his hand out totake the paper, but I tore it up instead and threw the pieces into the wastebasket.
"No more. I'm through running the maze. I'm in a blind alley now, and that'sall there is to it."He was afraid I'd run out, so he calmed me down. "That's all right, Charlie. Justtake it easy.""What do you mean `take it easy'? You don't know what it's like.""No, but I can imagine. We all feel pretty sick about it.""Keep your sympathy. Just leave me alone."He was embarrassed, and then I realized it wasn't his fault, and I was beinglousy toward him. "Sorry I blew up," I said. "How's everything going? Gotyour thesis finished yet?"
He nodded. "Having it retyped now. I'll get my Ph.D. in February""Good boy." I slapped him on the shoulder to show him I wasn't angry withhim. "Keep plugging. Nothing like an education. Look, forget what I saidbefore. I'll do anything else you want. Just no more mazes-that's all.""Well, Nemur wants a Rorschach check."
"To see what's happening down deep? What does he expect to find?"I must have looked upset, because he started to back off. "We don't have to. You'rehere voluntarily. If you don't want to -""That's all right. Go ahead. Deal out the cards. But don't tell me what youfind out."
He didn't have to.I knew enough about the Rorschach to know that it wasn't what you saw in thecards that counted, but how you reacted to them. As wholes, or parts, withmovement or just motionless figures, with special attention to the colorspots or ignoring them, with lots of ideas or just a few stereotypedresponses.
"It's not valid," I said. "I know what you're looking for. I know the kindof responses I'm supposed to have, to create a certain picture of what mymind is like. All I've got to do is... "
He looked up at me, waiting."All I've got to do is... "But then it hit me like a fist against the side f my head that I didn'tremember what I had to do. It was as if I had been looking at the whole thingclearly on the blackboard of my mind, but when I turned to read it, part ofit had been erased and the rest didn't make sense.
At first, I refused to believe it. I went through the cards in a panic, sofast that I was choking on my words. I wanted to tear the inkblots apart tomake them reveal themselves. Somewhere in those inkblots there were answersI had known just a little while ago. Not really in the inkblots, but in thepart of my mind that would give form and meaning to them and project myimprint on them.
And I couldn't do it. I couldn't remember what I had to say. All missing."That's a woman .." I said, "...on her knees washing the floors. Imean-no-it's a man holding a knife." And even as I said it, I knew what I wassaying and I switched away and started off in another direction. "Two figurestugging at something... like a doll... and each one is pulling so itlooks as if they're going to tear it apart and - no! - I mean it's two facesstaring at each other through the window, and-"
I swept the cards off the table and got up."No more tests. I don't want to take any more tests.""All right, Charlie. We'll stop for today.""Not just for today. I'm not coming back here any more. Whatever there isleft in me that you need, you can get from the progress reports. I'm throughrunning the maze. I'm not a guinea pig any more. I've done enough. I want tobe left alone now."
"All right, Charlie. I understand.""No, you don't understand because it isn't happening to you, and no one canunderstand but me. I don't blame you. You've got your job to do, and yourPh.D. to get, and-oh, yes, don't tell me, I know you're in this largely outof love of humanity, but still you've got your life to live and we don'thappen to belong on the same level. I passed your floor on the way up, andnow I'm passing it on the way down, and I don't think I'll be taking thiselevator again. So let's just say good-bye here and now."
"Don't you think you should talk to Dr.-""Say good-bye to everyone for me, will you? I don't feel like facing any ofthem again."
Before he could say any more or try to stop me, I was out of the lab, and Icaught the elevator down and out of Beekman for the last time.October 7 - Strauss tried to see me again this morning, but I wouldn't open thedoor. I want to be left to myself now.
It's a strange sensation to pick up a book you read and enjoyed just a fewmonths ago and discover you don't remember it. I recall how wonderful Ithought Milton was. When I picked up Paradise Lost I could only remember itwas about Adam and Eve and the Tree of Knowledge, but now I couldn't makesense of it.
I stood up and closed my eyes and saw Charlie, myself - six or seven years old,sitting at the dinner table with a schoolbook, learning to read, saying thewords over and over with my mother sitting beside him, beside me...
"Try it again.""See Jack. See lack run. See lack see.""Nol Not See Jack see! It's Run Jack run!" Pointing with her rough-scrubbedfinger."See Jack. See Jack run. Run Jack see.""No! You're not trying. Do it again!"Do it again... do it again... do it again..."Leave the boy alone. You've got him terrified.""He's got to learn. He's too lazy to concentrate."Run Jack run... run Jack run... run Jack run... run Jack run .."He's slower than the other children. Give him time.""He's normal. There's nothing wrong with him. Just lazy. I'll beat it intohim until he learns."
Run Jack run... run Jack run... run Jack run... run Jack run...And then looking up from the table, it seems to me I saw myself, throughCharlie's eyes, holding Paradise Lost, and I realized I was breaking thebinding with the pressure of both hands as if I wanted to tear the book inhalf. I broke the back of it, ripped out a handful of pages, and flung themand the book across the room to the corner where the broken records were. Ilet it lay there and its torn white tongues were laughing because I couldn'tunderstand what they were saying.I've got to try to hold onto some of the things I've learned. Please, God,don't take it all away.
October 10 - Usually at night I go out for walks, wander around the city. Idon't know why. To see faces, I guess. Last night I couldn't remember whereI lived. A policeman took me home. I have the strange feeling that this hasall happened to me before-a long time ago. I don't want to write it down, butI keep reminding myself that I'm the only one in the world who can describewhat happens when it goes this way.
Instead of walking I was floating through space, not clear and sharp, butwith a gray film over everything. I know what's happening to me, but there isnothing I can do about it. I walk, or just stand on the sidewalk and watchpeople go by. Some of them look at me, and some of them don't but nobody saysanything to me -- except one night a man came up and asked if I wanted a girl. Hetook me to a place. He wanted ten dollars first and I gave it to him, but he nevercame back.
And then I remembered what a fool I was.October 11 - When I came into my apartment this morning, I found Alice there,asleep on the couch. Everything was cleaned up, and at first I thought I wasin the wrong apartment, but then I saw she hadn't touched the smashed recordsor the torn books or the sheet music in the corner of the room. The floorcreaked and she woke up and looked at me."Hi," she laughed. "Some night owl."
"Not an owl. More of a dodo. A dumb dodo. How'd you get in here?""Through the fire escape. Fay's place. I called her to find out about youand she said she was worried. She says you've been acting strangely-causingdisturbances. So, I decided it was time for me to put in an appearance. Istraightened up a bit. I didn't think you'd mind.""I do mind... very much. I don't want anybody coming around feeling sorryfor me."
She went to the mirror to comb her hair. "I'm not here because I feel sorryfor you. It's because I feel sorry for me.""What's that supposed to mean?""It doesn't mean," she shrugged. "It just is-like a poem. I wanted to seeyou."
"What's wrong with the zoo?""Oh, come off it, Charlie. Don't fence with me. I waited long enough for youto come and get me. I decided to come to you."Why?"
"Because there's still time. And I want to spend it with you.""Is that a song?""Charlie, don't laugh at me.""I'm not laughing. But I can't afford to spend my time with anyone-there'sonly enough left for myself.""I can't believe you want to be completely alone.""I do."
"We had a little time together before we got out of touch. We had things totalk about, and things to do together. It didn't last very long but it wassomething. Look, we've known this might happen. It was no secret. I didn't goaway, Charlie, I've just been waiting. You're about at my level again, aren'tyou?"
I stormed around the apartment. "But that's crazy. There's nothing to lookforward to. I don't dare let myself think ahead-only back. In a few months,weeks, days-who the hell knows?-I'll go back to Warren. You can't follow methere."
"No," she admitted, "and I probably won't even visit you there. Once you'rein Warren I'll do my best to forget you. I'm not going to pretend otherwise. Butuntil you go, there's no reason for either of us to be alone."Before I could say anything, she kissed me. I waited, as she sat beside meon the couch, resting her head against my chest, but the panic didn'tcome. Alice was a woman, but perhaps now Charlie would understand that shewasn't his mother or his sister.
With the relief of knowing I had passed through a crisis, I sighed becausethere was nothing to hold me back. It was no time for fear or pretense,because it could never be this way with anyone else. All the barriers weregone. I had unwound the string she had given me, and found my way out of thelabyrinth to where she was waiting. I loved her with more than my body.I don't pretend to understand the mystery of love, but this time it was morethan sex, more than using a woman's body. It was being lifted off the earth,outside fear and torment, being part of something greater than myself. I waslifted out of the dark cell of my own mind, to become part of someoneelse-just as I had experienced it that day on the couch in therapy. It wasthe first step outward to the universe-beyond the universe-because in it andwith it we merged to recreate and perpetuate the human spirit. Expanding andbursting outward, and contracting and forming inward, it was the rhythm ofbeing-of breathing, of heartbeat, of day and night-and the rhythm of ourbodies set off an echo in my mind. It was the way it had been back there inthat strange vision. The gray murk lifted from my mind, and through it thelight pierced into my brain (how strange that light should blind!), and mybody was absorbed back into a great sea of space, washed under in a strangebaptism. My body shuddered with giving, and her body shuddered its acceptance.This was the way we loved, until the night became a silent day. And as I laythere with her I could see how important physical love was, how necessary itwas for us to be in each other's arms, giving and taking. The universe wasexploding, each particle away from the next, tearing hurtling us into darkand lonely space, <readerror> us away from each other-child out of thewomb, friend away from friend, moving from each other, each throughhis own pathway toward the goal-box of solitary death.
But this was the counterweight, the act of binding and holding. As when mento keep from being swept overboard in the storm clutch at each other's handsto resist being torn apart, so our bodies fused a link in the human chainthat kept us from being swept into nothing.And in the moment before I fell off into sleep, I remembered the way it hadbeen between Fay and myself, and I smiled. No wonder that had been easy. Ithad been only physical. This with Alice was a mystery.I leaned over and kissed her eyes.
Alice knows everything about me now, and accepts the fact that we can betogether for only a short while. She has agreed to go away when I tell her togo. It's painful to think about that, but what we have, I suspect, is morethan most people find in a lifetime.
October 14 - I wake up in the morning and don't know where I am or what I'mdoing here, and then I see her beside me and I remember. She senses whensomething is happening to me, and she moves quietly around the apartment,making breakfast, cleaning up the place, or going out and leaving me tomyself, without any questions.
We went to a concert this evening, but I got bored and we left in themiddle. Can't seem to pay much attention any more. I went because I know Iused to like Stravinsky but somehow I no longer have the patience for it.The only bad thing about having Alice here with me is that now I feel Ishould fight this thing. I want to stop time, freeze myself at this level andnever let go of her.
October 17 - Why can't I remember? I've got to try to resist thisslackness. Alice tells me I lie in bed for days and don't seem toknow who or where I am. Then it all comes back and I recognize her andremember what's happening. Fugues of amnesia. Symptoms of secondchildhood-what do they call it?-senility? I can watch it coming on.All so cruelly logical, the result of speeding up all the processes of themind. I learned so much so fast, and now my mind is deteriorating rapidly. Whatif I won't let it happen? What if I fight it? Think of those people at Warren,the empty smiles, the blank expressions, everyone laughing at them.Little Charlie Gordon staring at me through the window-waiting. Please, notthat again.
October 18 - I'm forgetting things I learned recently. It seems to be followingthe classic pattern, the last things learned are first things forgotten. Oris that the pattern? Better look it up again.Reread my paper on the Algernon-Gordon Effect and even though I know I wroteit, I keep feeling it was written by someone else. Most of it I don't evenunderstand.
But why am I so irritable? Especially when Alice is so good to me? She keepsthe place neat and clean, always putting my things away and washing dishesand scrubbing floors. I shouldn't have shouted at her the way I did thismorning because it made her cry, and I didn't want that to happen. But sheshouldn't have picked up the broken records and the music and the book andput them all neatly into a box. That made me furious. I don't want anyone totouch any of those things. I want to see them pile up. I want them to remindme of what I'm leaving behind. I kicked the box and scattered the stuff allover the floor and told her to leave them just where they were.Foolish. No reason for it. I guess I got sore because I knew she thought itwas silly to keep those things, and she didn't tell me she thought it wassilly. She just pretended it was perfectly normal. She's humoring me. Andwhen I saw that box I remembered the boy at Warren and the lousy lamp he madeand the way we were all humoring him, pretending he had done somethingwonderful when he hadn't.
That was what she was doing to me, and I couldn't stand it.When she went to the bedroom and cried I felt bad about it and I told her itwas all my fault. I don't deserve someone as good as her. Why can't I controlmyself just enough to keep on loving her? Just enough.October 19 - Motor activity impaired. I keep tripping and dropping things. Atfirst I didn't think it was me. I thought she was changing things around. Thewastebasket was in my way, and so were the chairs, and I thought she hadmoved them.
Now I realize my coordination is bad. I have to move slowly to get thingsright. And it's increasingly difficult to type. Why do I keep blaming Alice? Andwhy doesn't she argue? That irritates me even more because I see the pityin her face.
My only pleasure now is the TV set. I spend most of the day watching thequiz programs, the old movies, the soap operas, and even the kiddie shows andcartoons. And then I can't bring myself to turn it off. Late at night thereare the old movies, the horror pictures, the late show, and the late-lateshow, and even the little sermon before the channel signs off for the night,and the "StarSpangled Banner" with the flag waving in the background, andfinally the channel test pattern that stares back at me through the littlesquare window with its unclosing eye... .
Why am I always looking at life through a window?And after it's all over I'm sick with myself because there is so little timeleft for me to read and write and think, and because I should know betterthan to drug my mind with this dishonest stuff that's aimed at the child inme. Especially me, because the child in me is reclaiming my mind.I know all this, but when Alice tells me I shouldn't waste my time, I getangry and tell her to leave me alone.
I have a feeling I'm watching because it's important for me not to think,not to remember about the bakery, and my mother and father, and Norma. Idon't want to remember any more of the past.I had a terrible shock today. Picked up a copy of anarticle I had used in my research, Krueger's Uber Psychische Ganzheit, to seeif it would help me understand the paper I wrote and what I had done init. First I thought there was something wrong with my eyes. Then I realized Icould no longer read German. Tested myself in other languages. All gone.October 21 - Alice is gone. Let's see if I can remember. It started when shesaid we couldn't live like this with the torn books and papers and recordsall over the floor and the place in such a mess.
"Leave everything the way it is," I warned her.
"Why do you want to live this way?""I want everything where I put it. I want to see it all out here. You don'tknow what it's like to have something happening inside you, that you can'tsee and can't control, and know it's all slipping through your fingers.""You're right. I never said I could understand the things that werehappening to you. Not when you became too intelligent for me, and not now. ButI'll tell you one thing. Before you had the operation, you weren't likethis. You didn't wallow in your own filth and self-pity, you didn't polluteyour own mind by sitting in front of the TV set all day and night, you didn'tsnarl and snap at people. There was something about you that made us respectyou-yes,, even as you were. You had something I had never seen in a retardedperson before."
"I don't regret the experiment.""Neither do I, but you've lost something you had before. You had a smile...""An empty, stupid smile.""No, a warm, real smile, because you wanted people to like you.""And they played tricks on me, and laughed at me.""Yes, but even though you didn't understand why they were laughing, yousensed that if they could laugh at you they would like you. And you wantedthem to like you. You acted like a child and you even laughed at yourselfalong with them."
"I don't feel like laughing at myself right now, if you don't mind."She was trying to keep from crying. I think I wanted to make her cry. "Maybethat's why it was so important for me to learn. I thought it would makepeople like me. I thought I would have friends. That's something to laugh at, isn't it?""There's more to it than just having a high IQ"That made me angry. Probably because I didn't really understand what she wasdriving at. More and more these days she didn't come right out and say whatshe meant. She hinted at things. She talked around them and expected me toknow what she was thinking. And I listened, pretending I understood butinside I was afraid she would see that I missed the point completely.""I think it's time for you to leave."
Her face turned red. "Not yet, Charlie. It's not time yet. Don't send meaway.""You're making it harder for me. You keep pretending I can do things andunderstand things that are far beyond me now. You're pushing me. Just like mymother... ""That's not true!""Everything you do says it. The way you pick up and clean up after me, theway you leave books around that you think will get me interested in readingagain, the way you talk to me about the news to get me thinking. You say itdoesn't matter, but everything you do shows how much it matters. Always theschoolteacher. I don't want to go to concerts or museums or foreign films ordo anything that's going to make me struggle to think about life or aboutmyself.""Charlie-""Just leave me alone. I'm not myself. I'm falling apart, and I don't wantyou here."
That made her cry. This afternoon she packed her bags and left. Theapartment feels quiet and empty now.October 25 - Deterioration progressing. I've given up using the typewriter. Coordinationis too bad. From now on I'll have to write out these reports in longhand.I thought a lot about the things Alice said, and then it hit me that if Ikept on reading and learning new things, even while I was forgetting the oldones, I would be able to keep some of my intelligence. I was on a downescalator now. If I stood still I'd go all the way to the bottom, but if Istarted to run up maybe I could at least stay in the same place. Theimportant thing was to keep moving upward no matter what happened.So I went to the library and got out a lot of books to read. I've beenreading a lot now. Most of the books are too hard for me, but I don't care. Aslong as I keep reading I'll learn new things and I won't forget how to read. That'sthe most important thing. If I keep reading, maybe I can hold my own.Dr Strauss came around the day after Alice left, so I guess she told himabout me. He pretended all he wanted was the progress reports but I told himI would send them. I don't want him coming around here. I told him he doesn'thave to be worried about me because when I think I won't be able to take careof myself any more I'll get on a train and go to Warren.
I told him I'd rather just go by myself when the time comes.I tried to talk to Fay, but I can see she's afraid of me. I guess shefigures I've gone out of my mind. Last night she came home with somebody-helooked very young.
This morning the landlady, Mrs Mooney, came up with a bowl of hot chickensoup and some chicken. She said she just thought she would look in on me tosee if I was doing all right. I told her I had lots of food to eat but sheleft it anyway and it was good. She pretended she was doing it on her own butI'm not that stupid yet. Alice or Strauss must have told her to look in on meand make sure I was all right. Well, that's okay. She's a nice old lady withan Irish accent and she likes to talk all about the people in the building. Whenshe saw the mess on the floor inside my apartment she didn't say anything aboutit. I guess she's all right.
November 1 - A week since I dared to write again. I don't know where the timegoes. Todays Sunday I know because I can see through my window the peoplegoing into the church across the street. I think I laid in bed all week butI remember Mrs Mooney bringing me food a few times and asking if I was sick.What am I going to do with myself? I cant just hang around here all aloneand look out the window. Ive got to get hold of myself. I keep saying overand over that Ive got to do something but then I forget or maybe its justeasier not to do what I say I'm going to do.
I still have some books from the library but a lot of them are too hard for me. Iread a lot of mystery stories now and books about kings and queens from oldtimes. I read a book about a man who thought he was a knight and went out on anold horse with his friend. But no matter what he did he always ended up gettingbeaten and hurt. Like when he thought the windmills were dragons. At first Ithought it was a silly book because if he wasnt crazy he could see that windmillswerent dragons and there is no such thing as sorcerers and enchanted castles butthen I rememberd that there was something else it was all supposed to mean -something the story didnt say but only hinted at. Like there was other meanings. ButI dont know what. That made me angry because I think I used to know. But I'm keepingup with my reading and learning new things every day and I know its going to help me.I know I should have written some progress reports before this so they willknow whats happening to me. But writing is harder. I have to look up evensimple words in the dictionary now and it makes me angry with myself.
November 2 - I forgot to write in yesterdays report about the woman from thebuilding across the alley one floor down. I saw her through my kitchen windowlast week. I dont know her name, or even what her top part looks like butevery night about eleven oclock she goes into her bathroom to take a bath. Shenever pulls her shade down and thru my window when I put out my lights Ican see her from the neck down when she comes out of the bath to dry herself.It makes me excited, but when the lady turns out the light I feel let downand lonely. I wish I could see what she looks like sometimes, whether shespretty or what. I know its not nice to watch a woman when shes like that butI cant help it. Anyway what difference does it make to her if she doesnt knowI'm watching.
Its nearly eleven oclock now. Time for her bath. So Id better go see...Nov 5 - Mrs Mooney is very worried about me. She saysthe way I lay around all day and dont do anything I remind her of her sonbefore she threw him out of thehouse. She said she dont like loafters. If I'm sick its one thing but if I'ma loafter thats another thing and she has no use for me. I told her I thinkI'm sick.
I try to read a little bit every day mostly stories but sometimes I have toread the same thing over and over again because I dont know what it means. Andits hard to write. I know I should look up all the words in the dictionary butI'm so tired all the time.
Then I got the idea that I would only use the easy words instead of the longhard ones. That saves time. Its getting chilly out but I still put flowers onAlgernons grave. Mrs Mooney thinks I'm silly to put flowers on a mouses gravebut I told her that Algernon was a special mouse.I went over to visit Fay across the hall. But she told me to go away and notcome back. She put a new lock on her door.
Nov 9-Sunday again. I dont have anything to do to keep me busy now becausethe TV is broke and I keep forgetting to get it fixed. I think I lost thismonths check from the college. I dont remember.
I get awful headaches and asperin doesnt help much. Mrs Mooney believes nowthat I'm really sick and she feels very sory for me. She's a wonderful womanwhenever someone is sick. Its getting so cold out now that Ive got to weartwo sweaters.
The lady across the way pulls down her windowshade now, so I can't watch anymore. My lousy luck.
Nov 10-Mrs Mooney called a strange doctor to see me. She was afraid I wasgoing to die. I told the doctor I wasnt to sick and that I only forgetsometimes. He asked me did I have any friends or relatives and I said no Idont have any. I told him I had a friend called Algernon once but he was amouse and we use to run races together. He looked at me kind of funny like hethot I was crazy.
He smiled when I told him I use to be a genius. He talked to me like I wasa baby and he winked at Mrs Mooney. I got mad because he was making fun of meand laughing and I chased him out and locked the door.
I think I know why I been haveing bad luck. Because lost my rabits foot and myhorshoe. I got to get another rabits foot fast.
Nov 11 - Dr Strauss came to the door today and Alice to but I didnt let themcome in. I told them I didnt want anyone to see me. I want to be left alone.Later Mrs Mooney came up with some food and she told me they paid the rentand left money for her to buy food and anything I need. I told her I dontwant to use there money any more. She said moneys money and someone has topay or I have to put you out. Then she said why dont I get some job insteadof just hanging around.
I dont know any work but the job I use to do at the bakery. I dont want togo back their because they all knew me when I was smart and maybe theyll laffat me. But I dont know what else to do to get money. And I want to pay foreverything myself. I am strong and I can werk. If I cant take care of myselfI'll go to Warren. I wont take charety from anybody.
Nov 15 - I was looking at some of my old progress reports and its very strangebut I cant read what I wrote. I can make out some of the words but they dontmake sense. I think I wrote them but I dont remember so good. I get tiredvery fast when I try to read some of the books I baught in the drugstore. Exeptthe ones with the picturs of the pretty girls. I like to look at them but I havefunny dreams about them. Its not nice. I wont buy them any more. I saw in one ofthose books they got magic powder that can make you strong and smart and do lotsof things. I think mayby I'll send away and by some for myself.Nov 16 - Alice came to the door again but I said go away I dont want to seeyou. She cryed and I cryed to but I woudnt let her in because I didnt wanther to laff at me. I told her I didnt like her any more and I didnt want tobe smart any more either. Thats not true but. I still love her and I stillwant to be smart but I had to say that so she woud go away. Mrs Mooney toldme Alice brout some more money to look after me and for the rent. I dont wantthat. I got to get a job.
Please... please... dont let me forget how to reed and rite...Nov 18 - Mr Donner was very nice when I came back and askd him for my old jobat the bakery. Frist he was very suspicius but I told him what happened to meand then he looked very sad and put his hand on my shoulder and said Charlieyou got guts.
Evrybody looked at me when I came downstairs and started working in thetoilet sweeping it out like I use to do. I said to myself Charlie if theymake fun of you dont get sore because you remember their not so smart likeyou once thot they were. And besides they were once your frends and if theylaffed at you that dont mean anything because they liked you to.One of the new men who came to werk their after I went away his name isMeyer Klaus did a bad thing to me. He came up to me when I was loading thesacks of flower and he said hey Charlie I hear your a very smart fella-a realquiz kid. Say something inteligent. I felt bad because I could tell by theway he said it he was making fun of me. So I kept on with my werk. But thenhe came over and grabed me by the arm real hard and shouted at me. When Italk to you boy you better listen to me. Or I coud brake your arm for you. Hetwisted my arm so it hurt and I got scared he was going to brake it like hesaid. And he was laffing and twisting it, and I didnt know what to do. I gotso afraid I felt like I was gonna cry but I didnt and then I had to go to thebathroom something awful. My stomack was all twisting inside like I was gonnabust open if I didnt go right away... because I couldnt hold it back.I told him please let me go because I got to go to the toilet but he wasjust laffing at me and I dint know what to do. So I started crying. Let mego. Let me go. And then I made. It went in my pants and it smelled bad and Iwas crying. He let go of me then and made a sick face and he looked scaredthen. He said For gods sake I didnt mean anything Charlie.
But then Joe Carp came in and grabbed Klaus by the shirt and said leave himalone you lousy bastard or I'll brake your neck. Charlie is a good guy andnobodys gonna start up with him without answering for it. I felt ashamed andI ran to the toilet to clean myself and change my cloths.
When I got back Frank was there to and Joe was telling him about it andthen Gimpy came in and they told him about it and he said theyd get ridof Klaus. They were gonna tell Mr Donner to fire him. I told them I dintthink he should be fired and have to find another job because he had awife and a kid. And besides he said he was sorry for what he did to me.And I remember how sad I was when I had to get fired from thebakery and go away. I said Klaus shoud get a second chance because now hewouldnt do anything bad to me anymore.
Later Gimpy came over limping on his bad foot and he said Charlie if anyonebothers you or trys to take advantage you call me or Joe or Frank and we willset him strait. We all want you to remember that you got frends here and dontyou ever forget it. I said thanks Gimpy. That makes me feel good.Its good to have frends...
Nov 21 - I did a dumb thing today I forgot I wasnt in Miss Kinnians class atthe adult center any more like I use to be. I went in and sat down in my oldseat in the back of the room and she lookd at me funny and she said Charliewhere have you been. So I said hello Miss Kinnian Im redy for my lessen todayonly I lossed the book we was using.
She started to cry and run out of the room and everbody looked at me and Isaw alot of them wasnt the same pepul who use to be in my class.Then all of a suddin I remembered some things about the operashun and megetting smart and I said holy smoke I reely pulled a Charlie Gordon thattime. I went away before she came back to the room.Thats why Im going away from here for good to the Warren Home school. I dontwant to do nothing like that agen. I dont want Miss Kinnian to feel sorry forme. I know evrybody feels sorry for me at the bakery and I dont want thateather so Im going someplace where they are a lot of other pepul like me andnobody cares that Charlie Gordon was once a genus and now he cant even reeda book or rite good.
Im taking a cuple of books along and even if I cant reed them I'll practisehard and mabye I'll even get a littel bit smarter then I was before theoperashun without an operashun. I got a new rabits foot and a luky penny andeven a littel bit of that majic powder left and mabye they will help me.If you ever reed this Miss Kinnian dont be sorry for me. Im glad I got asecond chanse in life like you said to be smart because I lerned alot ofthings that I never even new were in this werld and Im grateful I saw it alleven for a littel bit. And Im glad I found out all about my family and me. Itwas like I never had a family til I remembird about them and saw them and nowI know I had a family and I was a person just like evryone.
I dont no why Im dumb agen or what I did rong. Mabye its because I dint tryhard enuf or just some body put the evel eye on me. But if I try and practisvery hard mabye I'll get a littel smarter and no what all the words are. Iremembir a littel bit how nice I had a feeling with the blue book that I redwith the toren cover. And when I close my eyes I think about the man whotored the book and he looks like me only he looks different and be talksdifferent but I dont think its me because its like I see him from the window.Anyway thats why Im gone to keep trying to get smart so I can have thatfeeling agen. Its good to no things and be smart and I wish I new evrythingin the hole world. I wish I coud be smart agen rite now. If I coud I woud sitdown and reed all the time.
Anyway I bet Im the frist dumb persen in the world who found out some thinginportent for sience. I did somthing but I dont remembir what. So I gess itslike I did it for all the dumb pepul like me in Warren and all over theworld.
Goodby Miss Kinnian and dr Strauss and evrybody...
P.S. please tel prof Nemur not to be such a grouch when pepul laff at himand he woud have more frends. Its easy to have fiends if you let pepul laffat you. Im going to have lots of fiends where I go.

P.S. please if you get a chanse put some flown on Algernons grave in the bakyard.THE END